
                              A
                          NARRATIVE

                           OF THE
                           MUTINY,

                        ON BOARD THE
                         SHIP GLOBE,
                        OF NANTUCKET,

                           IN THE
                   PACIFIC OCEAN, JAN. 1824
                           AND THE
                           JOURNAL

                            OF A
                    RESIDENCE OF TWO YEARS
                            ON THE
                       MULGRAVE ISLANDS;

             WITH OBSERVATIONS ON THE MANNERS AND
                 CUSTOMS OF THE INHABITANTS.


            BY WILLIAM LAY, OF SAYBROOK, CONN. AND
                CYRUS M. HUSSEY, OF NANTUCKET:

  The only Survivors from the Massacre of the Ship's Company
                       by the Natives.


                         NEW-LONDON:
           PUBLISHED BY WM. LAY, AND C. M. HUSSEY.

                            1828.




    INTRODUCTION.        v
    CHAPTER I.          11
    CHAPTER II.         27
    CHAPTER III.        50
    CHAPTER IV.         72
    CHAPTER V.          77
    CHAPTER VI.         98
    CHAPTER VII.       130
    CHAPTER VIII.      138
    CHAPTER IX.        154
    VOCABULARY.        165




DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS, TO WIT

                                        _District Clerk's Office._

Be it remembered, that on the twenty-fourth day of October, A. D.
1827, in the fifty-second year of the independence of the United
States of America, WILLIAM LAY and CYRUS M. HUSSEY, of the said
District, have deposited in this Office, the title of a Book, the
Right whereof they claim as Proprietors, in the words following, to
wit:

"A Narrative of the mutiny on board the Ship Globe, of Nantucket, in
the Pacific Ocean, Jan. 1824, and a Journal of a residence of two
years on the Mulgrave Islands, with observations on the manners and
customs of the inhabitants. By William Lay, of Saybrook, Conn. and
Cyrus M. Hussey, of Nantucket, the only Survivors from the Massacre of
the Ship's Company, by the Natives."

In conformity to the act of the Congress of the United States entitled
"an act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the Copies of
Maps, Charts, and Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of such Copies
during the times therein mentioned:" and also to an act entitled "an
act supplementary to an act, entitled an act, for the encouragement of
learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts, and Books to the
Authors and Proprietors of such copies, during the times therein
mentioned; and extending the benefits thereof to the arts of
Designing, Engraving, and Etching Historical and other Prints."

    JNO. W. DAVIS,
        _Clerk of the District of Massachusetts._

--------------------
_S. Green, Printer._
--------------------




TO JOHN PERCIVAL, ESQ.

OF THE U. S. NAVY,

Who, under the auspices of Government, visited the Mulgrave Islands,
to release the survivors of the Ship Globe's crew, and extended to
them every attention their unhappy situation required--the following
Narrative is most respectfully dedicated, by

        WILLIAM LAY, &
        CYRUS M. HUSSEY,
            The Authors.




INTRODUCTION.


Formerly whales were principally taken in the North Seas: the largest
were generally found about Spitzbergen, or Greenland, some of them
measuring ninety feet in length. At the commencement of the hazardous
enterprize of killing whales, before they had been disturbed by man,
they were so numerous in the bays and harbours, that when taken the
_blubber_ was for the most part boiled into oil upon the contiguous
coast.

The _pure_ oil and whale bone were only preserved in those days;
consequently a ship could carry home the product of a greater number
of whales than a ship of the same size now can.--Indeed, so plentiful
were the whales in those seas, and taken with such facility, that the
ships employed, were not sufficient to carry home the oil and bone,
and other ships were often sent to bring home the surplus quantity.
But the coasts of these countries, were soon visited by ships from
Denmark, Hamburgh, and Holland, as well as from England; and from
frequently being killed in the shoal water near the coasts, the whales
gradually receded from the shores, and have since been found only in
deeper water, and at a much greater distance from the land.

In the earlier stages of the whale fishery, of which we are now
treating, the ships were generally on the whaling waters, early in
May, and whether successful or not, they were obliged to commence
their return by the succeeding August, to avoid the early accumulation
of ice in those seas. But it not unfrequently happened, that ships
procured and returned with a cargo in the months of June and July,
making a voyage only about three months, whereas, a voyage to the
Pacific Ocean is now often protracted to three years!

Among the early whalers it was customary to have six boats to a ship,
and six men to a boat, besides the harpooner. What at _that time_ was
considered an improved method in killing whales, consisted in
discharging the harpoon, from a kind of swivel; but it was soon found
to be attended with too much inconvenience to be much practised, and
the muscular arms and steady nerves of the harpooner, have ever since
performed the daring duty, of first _striking_ the whale. The ropes
attached to the harpoon, used to be about 200 fathoms in length, and
some instances occurred, that all the lines belonging to six boats,
were fastened together and ran out by one whale, the animal descending
in nearly a perpendicular line from the surface. Instead of going
prepared to bring home a ship load of _oil_, it was customary to bring
only the blubber, and instead of trying the oil out and putting it
into casks on board, the fat of the whale was cut up into suitable
pieces, pressed hard in tubs carried out for the purpose, and in this
situation was the return cargo received at home.

Of so great consequence was the whale fishery considered to Great
Britain, that a bounty of 40s. for every ton, when the ship was 200
tons, or upwards, was given to the crews of ships engaged in that
business in the Greenland seas, under certain conditions. But this
bounty was found to draw too largely upon the treasury; and while the
subject was under discussion in the British Parliament, in 1786, it
was stated that the sums which that country had paid in bounties to
the Greenland fishers, amounted to 1,265,461 pounds sterling. Six
thousand seamen were employed in that fishery, and each cost the
government Â£13 10s. _per annum_. The great encouragement given to that
branch of commerce, caused so large a number to engage in it, that the
oil market became glutted, and it was found necessary to export
considerable quantities.

In 1786, the number of British ships engaged in the whale fishery to
Davis's Strait and the Greenland seas, was 139, besides 15 from
Scotland. In 1787, notwithstanding the bounty had been diminished, the
number of English ships was 217, and the following year 222.

The charter right of the Island of Nantucket, was bought by Thomas
Mayhew, of Watertown, of Joseph Ferrick, steward to Lord Sterling, in
1641; and afterwards sold to Tristram Coffin, and his associates, who
settled upon it in 1659. On the 10th of May, 1660, Sachems, Wonnook,
and Nickannoose, for and in behalf of the nations of the Island, in
consideration of the sum of 26_l._ sterling, conveyed by deed, about
half of the Island, to the first ten purchasers, who afterwards took
in other associates.

Whaling from Nantucket, was first carried on from the shore in boats.
In 1672, James Loper entered into a contract with the inhabitants of
the Island, for the purpose of prosecuting the whale fishery, by which
it appears that James Loper agreed to be one third in the enterprize,
and sundry other people of the Island, the other two thirds, in every
thing connected with the undertaking. It was further stipulated, that
for every whale killed by any one of the contracting party, the town
should receive five shillings, and for the encouragement of James
Loper, the town granted him ten acres of land in some convenient
situation, and liberty for the _commonage_ of three cows, twenty sheep
and one horse, with necessary wood and water for his use, on condition
that he should follow the _trade_ of whaling for two years, build upon
his land, &c. &c.

Thus it will be seen that the commencement of whaling at Nantucket,
was on a very small scale, and practised only along the shores of the
Island;--whereas, at this time, our ships leave no seas unexplored in
pursuit of these monsters of the deep. We might pursue the subject
through the various stages of improvement up to this time, but it
would swell this introduction beyond the limits designed. It is
proper, however, to observe that the present number of ships employed
in the whale fishery from Nantucket, is about 70, averaging about 350
tons each, and manned by about 1500 seamen.




NARRATIVE, &c.




CHAPTER I.


The Ship Globe, on board of which vessel occurred the horrid
transactions we are about to relate, belonged to the Island of
Nantucket; she was owned by Messrs. C. Mitchell, & Co. and other
merchants of that place; and commanded on this voyage by Thomas Worth,
of Edgartown, Martha's Vineyard. William Beetle, (mate,) John Lumbert,
(2d mate,) Nathaniel Fisher, (3d mate,) Gilbert Smith, (boat steerer,)
Samuel B. Comstock, do. Stephen Kidder, seaman, Peter C. Kidder, do.
Columbus Worth, do. Rowland Jones, do. John Cleveland, do. Constant
Lewis, do. Holden Henman, do. Jeremiah Ingham, do. Joseph Ignasius
Prass, do. Cyrus M. Hussey, cooper, Rowland Coffin, do. George
Comstock, seaman, and William Lay, do.

On the 15th day of December, we sailed from Edgarton, on a whaling
voyage, to the Pacific Ocean, but in working out, having carried away
the cross-jack-yard, we returned to port, and after having refitted
and sent aloft another, we sailed again on the 19th, and on the same
day anchored in Holmes' Hole. On the following day a favourable
opportunity offering to proceed to sea, we got under way, and after
having cleared the land, discharged the pilot, made sail, and
performed the necessary duties of stowing the anchors, unbending and
coiling away the cables, &c.--On the 1st of January 1823, we
experienced a heavy gale from N. W. which was but the first in the
catalogue of difficulties we were fated to encounter.--As this was our
first trial of a seaman's life, the scene presented to our view, "mid
the howling storm," was one of terrific grandeur, as well as of real
danger. But as the ship scudded well, and the wind was fair, she was
kept before it, under a close reefed main-top-sail and fore-sail,
although during the gale, which lasted forty-eight hours, the sea
frequently threatened to board us, which was prevented by the skillful
management of the helm. On the 9th of January we made the Cape Verd
Islands, bearing S. W. twenty-five miles distant, and on the 17th,
crossed the Equator. On the 29th of the same month we saw sperm
whales, lowered our boats, and succeeded in taking one; the blubber of
which, when boiled out, yielded us seventy-five barrels of oil.
Pursuing our voyage, on the twenty-third of February we passed the
Falkland Islands, and about the 5th of March, doubled the great
promontory of South America, Cape Horn, and stood to the Northward.

We saw whales once only before we reached the Sandwich Islands, which
we made on the first of May early in the morning. When drawing in with
the Island of Hawaii about four in the afternoon, the man at the mast
head gave notice that he saw a shoal of black fish on the lee bow;
which we soon found to be canoes on their way to meet us. It falling
calm at this time prevented their getting along side until night fall,
which they did, at a distance of more than three leagues from the
land. We received from them a very welcome supply of potatoes, sugar
cane, yams, cocoanuts, bananas, fish, &c. for which we gave them in
return, pieces of iron hoop, nails, and similar articles. We stood off
and on during the next day, and after obtaining a sufficient supply of
vegetables and fruit, we shaped our course for Oahu, at which place we
arrived on the following day, and after lying there twenty hours,
sailed for the coast of Japan, in company with the whaling ships
Palladium of Boston, and Pocahontas of Falmouth; from which ships we
parted company when two days out.--After cruising in the Japan seas
several months, and obtaining five hundred and fifty barrels of oil,
we again shaped our course for the Sandwich Islands, to obtain a
supply of vegetables, &c.

While lying at Oahu, six of the men deserted in the night; two of them
having been re-taken were put in irons, but one of them having found
means to divest himself of his irons, set the other at liberty, and
both escaped.

To supply their places, we shipped the following persons, viz: Silas
Payne, John Oliver, Anthony Hanson, a native of Oahu, Wm. Humphries, a
black man, and steward, and Thomas Lilliston.--Having accommodated
ourselves with as many vegetables and much fruit as could be
preserved, we again put to sea, fondly anticipating a successful
cruise, and a speedy and happy meeting with our friends. After leaving
Oahu we ran to the south of the Equator, and after cruising a short
time for whales without much success, we steered for Fannings Island,
which lies in lat. 3, 49 N. and long. 158, 29 W. While cruising off
this Island an event occurred which, whether we consider the want of
motives, or the cold blooded and obstinate cruelty with which it was
perpetrated, has not often been equalled.--We speak of the want of
motives, because, although some occurrences which we shall mention,
had given the crew some ground for dissatisfaction, there had been no
abuse or severity which could in the least degree excuse or palliate
so barbarous a mode of redress and revenge. During our cruise to Japan
the season before, many complaints were uttered by the crew among
themselves, with respect to the manner and quantity in which they
received their _meat_, the quantity sometimes being more than
sufficient for the number of men, and at others not enough to supply
the ship's company; and it is fair to presume, that the most
dissatisfied, deserted the ship at Oahu.

But the reader will no doubt consider it superfluous for us to attempt
an unrequired vindication of the conduct of the officers of the Globe
whose aim was to maintain a correct discipline, which should result in
the furtherance of the voyage and be a benefit to all concerned, more
especially when he is informed, that part of the men shipped at Oahu,
in the room of the deserters, were abandoned wretches, who frequently
were the cause of severe reprimands from the officers, and in one
instance one of them received a severe flogging. The reader will also
please to bear in mind, that Samuel B. Comstock, the ringleader of the
mutiny, was an officer, (being a boat-steerer,) and as is customary,
ate in the cabin. The conduct and deportment of the Captain towards
this individual, was always decorous and gentlemanly, a proof of
intentions long premeditated to destroy the ship. Some of the crew
were determined to leave the ship provided she touched at Fannings
Island, and we believe had concerted a plan of escape, but of which
the perpetration of a deed chilling to humanity, precluded the
necessity. We were at this time in company with the ship Lyra, of
New-Bedford, the Captain of which, had been on board the Globe during
the most of the day, but had returned in the evening to his own ship.
An agreement had been made by him with the Captain of the Globe, to
set a light at midnight as a signal for tacking. It may not be amiss
to acquaint the reader of the manner in which whalemen keep watch
during the night. They generally carry three boats, though some carry
four, five, and sometimes six, the Globe, however, being of the class
carrying three. The Captain, mate, and second mate stand no watch
except there is _blubber_ to be boiled; the boat-steerers taking
charge of the watch and managing the ship with their respective boats
crews, and in this instance dividing the night into three parts, each
taking a third. It so happened that Smith after keeping the first
watch, was relieved by Comstock, (whom we shall call by his sir name
in contradistinction to his brother George) and the _waist boat's
crew_, and the former watch retired below to their births and
hammocks. George Comstock took the helm, and during his _trick_,
received orders from his brother to "keep the ship a good full,"
swearing that the ship was too nigh the wind. When his time at the
helm had expired he took the _rattle_, (an instrument used by
whalemen, to announce the expiration of the hour, the watch, &c.) and
began to shake it, when Comstock came to him, and in the most
peremptory manner, ordered him to desist, saying "if you make the
least damn bit of noise I'll send you to hell!" He then lighted a lamp
and went into the steerage. George becoming alarmed at this conduct of
his unnatural brother, again took the _rattle_ for the purpose of
alarming some one; Comstock arrived in time to prevent him, and with
threatenings dark and diabolical, so congealed the blood of his
trembling brother, that even had he possessed the power of alarming
the unconscious and fated victims below, his life would have been the
forfeit of his temerity!

Comstock, now laid something heavy upon a small work bench near the
cabin gangway, which was afterwards found to be a boarding knife. It
is an instrument used by whalers to cut the _blubber_ when hoisting it
in, is about four feet in length, two or three inches wide, and
necessarily kept very sharp, and for greater convenience when in use,
is two edged.

In giving a detail of this chilling transaction, we shall be guided by
the description given of it by the younger Comstock, who, as has been
observed, was upon deck at the time, and afterwards learned several
particulars from his brother, to whom alone they could have been
known. Comstock went down into the cabin, accompanied by Silas Payne
or Paine, of Sag-Harbour, John Oliver, of Shields, Eng., William
Humphries, (the steward) of Philadelphia, and Thomas Lilliston; the
latter, however, went no farther than the cabin gangway, and then ran
forward and _turned in_. According to his own story he did not think
they would attempt to put their designs in execution, until he saw
them actually descending into the cabin, having gone so far, to use
his own expression, to show himself as brave as any of them. But we
believe he had not the smallest idea of assisting the villains.
Comstock entered the cabin so silently as not to be perceived by the
man at the helm, who was first apprised of his having begun the work
of death, by the sound of a heavy blow with an axe, which he
distinctly heard.

The Captain was asleep in a hammock, suspended in the cabin, his state
room being uncomfortably warm; Comstock approaching him with the axe,
struck him a blow upon the head, which was nearly severed in two by
the first stroke! After repeating the blow, he ran to Payne, who it
seems was stationed with the before mentioned boarding knife, to
attack the mate, as soon as the Captain was killed. At this instant,
Payne making a thrust at the mate, he awoke, and terrified, exclaimed,
"what! what! what!" "Is this----Oh! Payne! Oh! Comstock!" "Don't kill
me, don't;" "have I not always----" Here Comstock interrupted him,
saying, "Yes! you have always been a d--d rascal; you tell lies of me
out of the ship will you? It's a d--d good time to beg now, but you're
too late," here the mate sprang, and grasped him by the throat. In the
scuffle, the light which Comstock held in his hand was knocked out,
and the axe fell from his hand; but the grasp of Mr. Beetle upon his
throat, did not prevent him from making Payne understand that his
weapon was lost, who felt about until he found it, and having given it
to Comstock, he managed to strike him a blow upon the head, which
fractured his skull; when he fell into the pantry where he lay
groaning until despatched by Comstock! The steward held a light at
this time, while Oliver put in a blow as often as possible!

The second and third mates, fastened in their state rooms, lay in
their births listening, fearing to speak, and being ignorant of the
numerical strength of the mutineers, and unarmed, thought it best to
wait the dreadful issue, hoping that their lives might yet be spared.

Comstock leaving a watch at the second mate's door, went upon deck to
light another lamp at the binnacle, it having been again accidentally
extinguished. He was there asked by his terrified brother, whose agony
of mind we will not attempt to portray, if he intended to hurt Smith,
the other boat-steerer. He replied that he did; and inquired where he
was. George fearing that Smith would be immediately pursued, said he
had not seen him.--Comstock then perceiving his brother to be shedding
tears, asked sternly, "What are you crying about?" "I am afraid,"
replied George, "that they will hurt me!" "I _will_ hurt you," said
he, "if you talk in that manner!"

But the work of death was not yet finished. Comstock, took his light
into the cabin, and made preparations for attacking the second and
third mates, Mr. Fisher, and Mr. Lumbert. After loading two muskets,
he fired one through the door, in the direction as near as he could
judge of the officers, and then inquired if either was shot! Fisher
replied, "yes, I am shot in the mouth!" Previous to his shooting
Fisher, Lumbert asked if he was going to kill him? To which he
answered with apparent unconcern, "Oh no, I guess not."

They now opened the door, and Comstock making a pass at Mr. Lumbert,
missed him, and fell into the state room. Mr. Lumbert collared him,
but he escaped from his hands. Mr. Fisher had got the gun, and
actually presented the bayonet to the monster's heart! But Comstock
assuring him that his life should be spared if he gave it up, he did
so; when Comstock immediately ran Mr. Lumbert through the body several
times!!

He then turned to Mr. Fisher, and told him there was no hope for
_him_!!--"You have got to die," said he, "remember the scrape you got
me into, when in company with the Enterprise of Nantucket." The
"scrape" alluded to, was as follows. Comstock came up to Mr. Fisher to
wrestle with him.--Fisher being the most athletick of the two, handled
him with so much ease, that Comstock in a fit of passion _struck him_.
At this Fisher seized him, and laid him upon deck several times in a
pretty rough manner.

Comstock then made some violent threats, which Fisher paid no
attention to, but which now fell upon his soul with all the horrors of
reality. Finding his cruel enemy deaf to his remonstrances, and
entreaties, he said, "If there is no hope, I will at least die like a
man!" and having by order of Comstock, turned back too, said in a firm
voice, "_I am ready!!_"

Comstock then put the muzzle of the gun to his head, and fired, which
instantly put an end to his existence!--Mr. Lumbert, during this time,
was begging for life, although no doubt mortally wounded. Comstock,
turned to him and said, "I am a bloody man! I have a bloody hand and
_will_ be avenged!" and _again_ run him through the body with a
bayonet! He then begged for a little water; "I'll give you water,"
said he, and once more plunging the weapon in his body, left him for
dead!

Thus it appears that this more than demon, murdered with his own hand,
the whole! Gladly would we wash from "memory's waste" all remembrance
of that bloody night. The compassionate reader, however, whose heart
sickens within him, at the perusal, as does ours at the recital, of
this tale of woe, will not, we hope, disapprove our publishing these
melancholy facts to the world. As, through the boundless mercy of
Providence, we have been restored, to the bosom of our families and
homes, we deemed it a duty we owe to the world, to record our
"unvarnished tale."




CHAPTER II.


Smith, the other boat-steerer, who had been marked as one of the
victims, on hearing the noise in the cabin, went aft, apprehending an
altercation between the Captain and some of the other officers, little
dreaming that innocent blood was flowing in torrents. But what was his
astonishment, when he beheld Comstock, brandishing the boarding knife,
and heard him exclaim, "I am the bloody man, and will have revenge!"
Horror struck, he hurried forward, and asked the crew in the
forecastle, what he should do. Some urged him to secrete himself in
the hold, others to go aloft until Comstock's rage should be abated;
but alas! the reflection that the ship afforded no secure hiding
place, determined him to confront the ringleader, and if he could not
save his life by fair means, to sell it dearly! He was soon called
for by Comstock, who upon meeting him, threw his bloody arms around
his neck, and embracing him, said, "you are going to be with us, are
you not?" The reader will discover the good policy of Smith when he
unhesitatingly answered, "Oh, yes, I will do any thing you require."

All hands were now called to make sail, and a light at the same time
was set as a signal for the Lyra to tack;--while the Globe was kept
upon the same tack, which very soon caused a separation of the two
ships. All the reefs were turned out, top-gallant-sails set, and all
sail made on the ship, the wind being quite light.

The mutineers then threw the body of the Captain overboard, after
wantonly piercing his bowels with a boarding knife, which was _driven
with an axe_, until the point protruded from his throat!! In Mr.
Beetle, the mate, the lamp of life had not entirely gone out, but he
was committed to the deep.

Orders were next given to have the bodies of Mr. Fisher, and Mr.
Lumbert brought up. A rope was fastened to Fisher's neck, by which he
was hauled upon deck. A rope was made fast to Mr. Lumbert's feet, and
in this way was he got upon deck, but when in the act of being thrown
from the ship, he caught the plank-shear; and appealed to Comstock,
reminding him of his promise to save him, but in vain; for the monster
forced him from his hold, and he fell into the sea! As he appeared to
be yet capable of swimming, a boat was ordered to be lowered, to
pursue and finish him, fearing he might be picked up by the Lyra;
which order was as soon countermanded as given, fearing, no doubt, a
desertion of his murderous companions.

We will now present the reader, with a journal of our passage to the
Mulgrave Islands, for which groupe we shaped our course.

1824, Jan. 26th. At 2 A. M. from being nearly calm a light breeze
sprung up, which increased to a fresh breeze by 4 A. M. This day
cleaned out the cabin, which was a scene of blood and destruction of
which the recollection at this day chills the blood in our
veins.--Every thing bearing marks of the murder, was brought on deck
and washed.

Lat. 5Â° 50' N. Long. 159Â° 13' W.

Jan. 27th. These twenty-four hours commenced with moderate breezes
from the eastward. Middle and latter part calm. Employed in cleaning
the small arms which were fifteen in number, and making cartridge
boxes.

Lat. 3Â° 45' N. Long. 160Â° 45' W.

Jan. 28. This day experienced fine weather, and light breezes from N.
by W. The black steward was hung for the following crime.

George Comstock who was appointed steward after the mutiny, and
business calling him into the cabin, he saw the former steward, now
called the purser, engaged in loading a pistol. He asked him what he
was doing that for. His reply was, "I have heard something very
strange, and I'm going to be ready for it." This information was
immediately carried to Comstock, who called to Payne, now mate, and
bid him follow him.

On entering the cabin they saw Humphreys, still standing with the
pistol in his hand. On being demanded what he was going to do with it,
he said he had heard something which made him afraid of his life!

Comstock told him if he had heard any thing, that he ought to have
come to him, and let him know, before he began loading pistols. He
then demanded to know, what he had heard. Humphreys answered at first
in a very suspicious and ambiguous manner, but at length said, that
Gilbert Smith, the boat-steerer who was saved, and Peter Kidder, were
going to re-take the ship. This appeared highly improbable, but they
were summoned to attend a council at which Comstock presided, and
asked if they had entertained any such intentions. They positively
denied ever having had conversation upon the subject. All this took
place in the evening. The next morning the parties were summoned, and
a jury of two men called. Humphreys under a guard of six men, armed
with muskets, was arraigned, and Smith and Kidder, seated upon a chest
near him. The prisoner was asked a few questions touching his
intentions, which he answered but low and indistinctly. The trial, if
it may be so called, had progressed thus far, when Comstock made a
speech in the following words. "It appears that William Humphreys _has
been accused guilty_, of a _treacherous and base act_, in loading a
pistol for the purpose of shooting Mr. Payne and myself. Having been
tried the jury will now give in their verdict, whether Guilty or Not
Guilty. If guilty he shall be hanged to a studding-sail boom, rigged
out eight feet upon the fore-yard, but if found not guilty, Smith and
Kidder, shall be hung upon the aforementioned gallows!" But the doom
of Humphreys had been sealed the night before, and kept secret _except
from the jury_, who returned a verdict of Guilty.--Preparations were
immediately made for his execution! His watch was taken from him, and
he was then taken forward and seated upon the rail, with a cap drawn
over his face, and the rope placed round his neck.

Every man was ordered to take hold of the execution rope, to be ready
to run him up when Comstock should give the signal, by ringing the
ship's bell!

He was now asked if he had any thing to say, as he had but fourteen
seconds to live! He began by saying, "little did I think I was born to
come to this------;" the bell struck! and he was immediately swung to
the yard-arm! He died without a struggle; and after he had hung a few
minutes, the rope was cut, to let him fall overboard, but getting
entangled aloft, the body was towed some distance along side, when a
_runner hook_,[A] was attached to it, to sink it, when the rope was
again cut and the body disappeared. His chest was now overhauled, and
sixteen dollars in specie found, which he had taken from the Captain's
trunk. Thus ended the life of one of the mutineers, while the blood of
innocent victims was scarcely washed from his hands, much less the
guilty stain from his soul.

    [A] A large hook used when hoisting in the blubber.

Feb. 7th. These twenty-four hours commenced with thick squally
weather. Middle part clear and fine weather.--Hove to at 2 A. M., and
at 6 made sail, and steered W. by S. At Â½ past 8 made an Island ahead,
one of the Kingsmill groupe. Stood in with the land and received a
number of canoes along side, the natives in them however having
nothing to sell us but a few beads of their own manufacture. We saw
some cocoanut, and other trees upon the shore, and discovered many of
the natives upon the beach, and some dogs. The principal food of these
Islanders is, a kind of bread fruit, which they pound very fine and
mix it with fish.

Feb. 8. Commences squally with fresh breezes from the
northward.--Took a departure from Kingsmill Island; one of the groupe
of that name, in Lat. 1Â° 27' N. and Long. 175Â° 14' E. In the morning
passed through the channel between Marshall's and Gilbert's Islands;
luffed to and despatched a boat to Marshall's Island, but did not
land, as the natives appeared hostile, and those who swam off to the
boat, endeavoured to steal from her. When about to leave, a volley of
musketry was discharged at them, which probably killed or wounded some
of them. The boat then gave chase to a canoe, paddled by two of the
natives, which were fired upon when within gunshot, when they
immediately ceased paddling; and on the boat approaching them,
discovered that one of the natives was wounded. In the most
supplicating manner they held up a jacket, manufactured from a kind of
flag, and some beads, being all they possessed, giving their inhuman
pursuers to understand, that all should be theirs if they would spare
their lives! The wounded native laid down in the bottom of the boat,
and from his convulsed frame and trembling lip, no doubt remained but
that the wound was mortal. The boat then returned on board and we made
sail for the Mulgrave Islands. Here was another sacrifice; an innocent
child of nature shot down, merely to gratify the most wanton and
unprovoked cruelty, which could possibly possess the heart of man. The
unpolished savage, a stranger to the more tender sympathies of the
human heart, which are cultivated and enjoyed by civilized nations,
nurtures in his bosom a flame of revenge, which only the blood of
those who have injured him, can damp; and when years have rolled away,
this act of cruelty will be remembered by these Islanders, and made
the pretext to slaughter every white man who may fall into their
hands.

Feb. 11th. Commenced with strong breezes from the Northward. At Â½ past
meridian made the land bearing E. N. E. four leagues distant. Stood in
and received a number of canoes along side. Sent a boat on shore; and
brought off a number of women, a large quantity of cocoanuts, and some
fish.--Stood off shore most of the night, and

Feb. 12th, in the morning stood in shore again and landed the
women.--We then stood along shore looking out for an anchorage, and
reconnoitering the country, in the hope of finding some spot suitable
for cultivation; but in this we were disappointed, or more properly
speaking, they, the mutineers; for we had no will of our own, while
our bosoms were torn with the most conflicting passions, in which Hope
and Despair alternately gained the ascendency.

Feb. 13th. After having stood off all night, we in the morning stood
in, and after coasting the shores of several small Islands, we came to
one, low and narrow, where it was determined the Ship should be
anchored. When nearly ready to let go, a man was sent into the chains
to sound, who pronounced twelve fathoms; but at the next cast, could
not get bottom. We continued to stand in, until we got regular
sounding, and anchored within five rods of the shore, on a coral rock
bottom, in seven fathoms water. The ship was then moored with a kedge
astern, sails furled, and all hands retired to rest, except an _anchor
watch_.

Feb. 14th, was spent in looking for a landing place. In the morning a
boat was sent to the Eastward, but returned with the information that
no good landing place could be found, the shore being very rocky. At 2
P. M. she was sent in an opposite direction, but returned at night
without having met with better success; when it was determined to land
at the place where we lay; notwithstanding it was very rocky.--Nothing
of consequence was done, until

Sunday, 15th Feb. 1824, when all hands were set to work to construct a
raft out of the spare spars, upon which to convey the provisions, &c.
on shore.

The laws by which we were now governed had been made by Comstock,
soon after the mutiny, and read as follows:

"That if any one saw a sail and did not report it immediately, he
should be put to death! If any one refused to fight a ship he should
be put to death; and the manner of their death, this--They shall be
bound hand and foot and boiled in the _try pots_, of boiling oil!"
Every man was made to seal and sign this instrument, the seals of the
mutineers being _black_, and the remainder, _blue_ and _white_. The
raft or stage being completed, it was anchored, so that one end rested
upon the rocks, the other being kept sea-ward by the anchor. During
the first day many articles were brought from the ship in boats, to
the raft, and from thence conveyed on shore. Another raft, however,
was made, by laying spars upon two boats, and boards again upon them,
which at high water would float well up on the shore. The following,
as near as can be recollected, were the articles landed from the ship;
(and the intention was, when all should have been got on shore, to
haul the ship on shore, or as near it as possible and burn her.) One
mainsail, one foresail, one mizen-topsail, one spanker, one driver,
one maintop gallantsail, two lower studdingsails, two royals, two
topmast-studdingsails, two top-gallant-studdingsails, one
mizen-staysail, two mizen-top-gallantsails, one fly-gib, (thrown
overboard, being a little torn,) three boat's sails (new,) three or
four casks of bread, eight or ten barrels of flour, forty barrels of
beef and pork, three or more 60 gal. casks of molasses, one and a half
barrels of sugar, one barrel dried apples, one cask vinegar, two casks
of rum, one or two barrels domestic coffee, one keg W. I. coffee, one
and a half chests of tea, one barrel of pickles, one do. cranberries,
one box chocolate, one cask of tow-lines, three or more coils of
cordage, one coil rattling, one do. lance warp, ten or fifteen balls
spunyarn, one do. worming, one stream cable, one larboard bower
anchor, all the spare spars, every chest of clothing, most of the
ship's tools, &c. &c. The ship by this time was considerably unrigged.

On the following day, Monday 16th February, Payne the second in the
mutiny, who was on board the ship attending to the discharge of
articles from her, sent word to Comstock, who with Gilbert Smith and a
number of the crew were on shore, attending to the landing of the
raft; "That if he did not act differently with regard to the plunder,
such as making presents to the natives of the officers' fine clothing,
&c. he would do no more, but quit the ship and come on shore."
Comstock had been very liberal to the natives in this way, and his
object was, no doubt, to attach them as much as possible to his
person, as it must have been suggested to his guilty mind, that
however he himself might have become a misanthrope, yet there were
those around him, whose souls shuddered at the idea of being forever
exiled from their country and friends, whose hands were yet unstained
by blood, but who might yet imbrue them, for the purpose of escape
from lonely exile, and cruel tyranny.

When the foregoing message was received from Payne, Comstock commanded
his presence immediately on shore, and interrogated him, as to what he
meant by sending such a message. After considerable altercation, which
took place in the tent, Comstock was heard to say, "I helped to take
the ship, and have navigated her to this place.--I have also done all
I could to get the sails and rigging on shore, and now you may do what
you please with her; but if any man wants any thing of _me_, I'll take
a musket with him!"

"That is what I want," replied Payne, "and am ready!" This was a check
upon the murderer, who had now the offer of becoming a duellist; and
he only answered by saying, "I will go on board once more, and then
you may do as you please."

He then went on board, and after destroying the paper upon which were
recorded the "Laws," returned, went into the tent with Payne, and
putting a sword into a scabbard, exclaimed, "_this_ shall stand by me
as long as I live."

We ought not to omit to mention that during the time he was on board
the ship, he challenged the persons there, to fight him, and as he was
leaving, exclaimed "I am going to leave you; _Look out for
yourselves!_"

After obtaining from Payne permission to carry with him a cutlass, a
knife, and some hooks and lines, he took his departure, and as was
afterwards ascertained, immediately joined a gang of natives, and
endeavoured to excite them to slay Payne and his companions! At dusk
of this day he passed the tent, accompanied by about 50 of the
natives, in a direction of their village, upwards of a league distant.
Payne came on board, and after expressing apprehensions that Comstock
would persuade the natives to kill us all, picked out a number of the
crew to go on shore for the night, and stationed sentinels around the
tent, with orders to shoot any one, who should attempt to approach
without giving the countersign. The night, however, passed, without
any one's appearing; but early on the morning of the

17th Feb.; Comstock was discovered at some distance coming towards the
tent. It had been before proposed to Smith by Payne, to shoot him; but
poor Smith like ourselves, dare do no other than remain upon the side
of neutrality.

Oliver, whom the reader will recollect as one of the wretches
concerned in the mutiny, hurried on shore, and with Payne and others,
made preparations to put him to death. After loading a number of
muskets they stationed themselves in front of the tent, and waited his
approach--a bushy spot of ground intervening, he did not make his
appearance until within a short distance of the tent, which, as soon
as he saw, drew his sword and walked quick towards it, in a menacing
manner; but as soon as he saw a number of the muskets levelled at
him, he waved his hand, and cried out, "don't shoot me, don't shoot
me! I will not hurt you!" At this moment they fired, and he
fell!--Payne fearing he might _pretend_ to be shot, ran to him with an
axe, and nearly severed his head from his body! There were four
muskets fired at him, but only two balls took effect, one entered his
right breast, and passed out near the back bone, the other through his
head.

Thus ended the life, of perhaps as cruel, blood-thirsty, and
vindictive a being as ever bore the form of humanity.

All hands were now called to attend his burial, which was conducted in
the same inconsistent manner which had marked the proceedings of the
actors in this tragedy. While some were engaged in sewing the body in
a piece of canvas, others were employed in digging a grave in the
sand, adjacent to the place of his decease, which, by order of Payne,
was made five feet deep. Every article attached to him, including his
cutlass, was buried with him, except his watch; and the ceremonies
consisted in _reading a chapter from the bible over him, and firing a
musket_!

Only twenty-two days had elapsed after the perpetration of the
massacre on board the ship, when with all his sins upon his head, he
was hurried into eternity!

No duty was done during the remainder of the day, except the selection
by Payne, of six men, to go on board the ship and take charge of her,
under the command of Smith; who had communicated his intentions to a
number of running away with the ship. We think we cannot do better
than to give an account of their escape in the words of Smith himself.
It may be well to remark, that Payne had ordered the two binacle
compasses to be brought on shore, they being the only ones remaining
on board, except a hanging compass suspended in the cabin. Secreting
one of the binacle compasses, he took the hanging compass on shore,
and the exchange was not discovered.

"At 7 P. M. we began to make preparations for our escape with the
ship.--I went below to prepare some weapons for our defence should we
be attacked by Payne, while the others, as silently as possible, were
employed in clearing the running rigging, for every thing was in the
utmost confusion. Having found one musket, three bayonets, and some
whale lances, they were laid handy, to prevent the ship being boarded.
A handsaw well greased was laid upon the windlass to saw off the
cable, and the only remaining hatchet on board, was placed by the
mizen mast, to cut the stern moorings when the ship should have
sufficiently swung off. Taking one man with me, we went upon the
fore-top-sail-yard, loosed the sail and turned out the reefs, while
two others were loosing the main-top-sail and main sail. I will not
insult the reader's good sense, by assuring him, that this was a duty,
upon the success of which seemed to hang our very existence. By this
time the moon was rising, which rendered it dangerous to delay, for
those who had formed a resolution to swim on board, and accompany us.
The _bunts_ of the sails being yet confined aloft, by their respective
gaskets, I sent a man on the fore-yard and another upon the
fore-top-sail-yard, with orders to _let fall_, when I should give the
word; one man being at the helm, and two others at the fore tack.

"It was now half past nine o'clock, when I took the handsaw, and in
less than two minutes the cable was off!--The ship _payed off_ very
quick, and when her head was off the land, there being a breeze from
that quarter, the hawser was cut and all the sail we could make upon
the ship immediately set, a fine fair wind blowing. A raft of iron
hoops, which was towing along side, was cut adrift, and we
congratulated each other upon our fortunate escape; for even with a
vast extent of ocean to traverse, hope excited in our bosoms a belief
that we should again embrace our friends, and our joy was heightened
by the reflection, that we might be the means of rescuing the
innocents left behind, and having the guilty punished."

After a long and boisterous passage the ship arrived at Valparaiso,
when she was taken possession of by the American Consul, Michael
Hogan, Esq. and the persons on board were put in irons on board a
French frigate, there being no American man-of-war in port. Their
names were, Gilbert Smith, George Comstock, Stephen Kidder, Joseph
Thomas, Peter C. Kidder, and Anthony Henson.

Subsequently they were all examined before the U. S. Consul; and with
the following, an examination of Gilbert Smith, we shall commence
another chapter.




CHAPTER III.


    U. S. Consulate,
        Valparaiso, 15th June, 1824.

Gilbert Smith examined on oath, touching the mutiny and murder on
board the whale ship Globe, of Nantucket, Massachusetts, in the
Pacific Ocean.

_Question._ Who were the Captain and mates of the ship Globe?

_Ans._ Thomas Worth, Captain; William Beetle, first mate; John
Lumbert, second mate; Nathaniel Fisher, third mate.

_Q._ Where was you born?

_A._ In the town of Edgarton, State of Massachusetts.

_Q._ Did you sail from thence in the ship Globe of Nantucket, 20th
Dec. 1822, and in what capacity?

_A._ Yes; as a boat-steerer.

_Q._ Was there any thing like mutiny on board the ship during her
passage to the Sandwich Islands?

_A._ No.

_Q._ How many men belonged to the ship on sailing from Nantucket?

_A._ Twenty-one in all.

_Q._ Did any run away at the Sandwich Islands?

_A._ Six men ran away, and one was discharged.

_Q._ How many men were shipped in their places?

_A._ John Oliver, of Shields, England; Silas Payne, of Rhode Island;
Thomas Lilliston, of Virginia; William Steward, of Philadelphia,
(black;) Anthony Henson, of Barnstable; and a native of the Sandwich
Islands.

_Q._ On what day or night did this murderous mutiny take place?

_A._ On Sunday night the 26th of January, this year; in the morning of
that day there was a great disturbance, in consequence of Joseph
Thomas having insulted the Captain, for which he was whipped by the
Captain, with the end of the main buntline. The part of the crew not
_stationed_ stood in the hatchway during the punishment.

_Q._ Did any thing happen in consequence, during that day?

_A._ No: I lived aft; I heard nothing about it; Capt. Joy of the Lyra,
was on board nearly all day.

_Q._ How were you stationed during the night?

_A._ The Captain, first and second mates, kept no watch during that
night; the rest of the crew were stationed in three watches, in charge
of the third mate and boat-steerers.

_Q._ Who had charge of the first watch during that night?

_A._ I had charge of the watch from 7 to 10 o'clock. At 8 the Captain
came on deck, and had two reefs taken in the topsails, and at 9 went
down, leaving me the orders for the night, to keep the ship _by the
wind_, until two o'clock, and not to tack until the other watch came
up; and on tacking, a light to be set for the Lyra who was in company,
to tack also.

At 10 o'clock I went below, being relieved by the boat-steerer Comstock,
to whom I passed the orders given me by the Captain,----(Here follows a
detailed account of the mutiny, with which the reader has already been
made acquainted.)

_Q._ Do you believe that Joseph Thomas had any knowledge of Comstock's
intent to commit murder that night?

_A._ I think he must have known something about it, according to his
talk.

_Q._ Do you believe that any other person in the ship, besides those
persons who committed the murder, knew of the intention?

_A._ Thomas Lilliston knew about it, because he went to the cabin door
with an axe, and a _boat knife_ in his hand, in company with the
murderers, but he did not go below.

_Q._ Did you live with them aft, afterwards?

_A._ No: I lived in the forecastle, but all on board eat in the cabin.

_Q._ Name all the persons you left on the Island, where you cut the
cable of the ship and escaped.

_A._ Silas Payne, John Oliver, (being the principal mutineers next to
Samuel B. Comstock,) Thomas Lilliston, Rowland Coffin, _William Lay_,
_Cyrus M. Hussey_, Columbus Worth, Rowland Jones, and the Sandwich
Island native, called Joseph Brown. The last five I believe ignorant
of any knowledge of the intent to murder.

_Q._ What became of Samuel B. Comstock, who was the head mutineer
after he landed upon the Island?

_A._ He was shot on the morning of the 17th Feb. by Silas Payne, and
John Oliver, his associates in all the mutiny and murderous course
they had pursued, and buried five feet deep on the beach near their
tent; a chapter was read from the bible by me, acting under the orders
of Payne, and muskets were fired by his orders, by the men.

_Q._ Why did they murder Comstock?

_A._ For giving away to the natives clothes and other articles before
they were divided.

_Q._ Were the natives friendly and quiet?

_A._ Yes; very peaceable, gave away any thing they had; bread fruit,
cocoanuts and other things.

_Q._ How did Joseph Thomas conduct himself during the passage from the
Isle to this port?

_A._ In common, when help was called, he was the first man
disobedient, and frequently said he would do as he pleased.

_Q._ Did he often speak of the murder, or of his knowing it about to
take place?

_A._ I only remember, having heard him twice. I told him when we
arrived, I would inform the American Consul of it; to which he
replied, he should own all he knew about it.

_Q._ To what State does he belong to your knowledge?

_A._ To the State of Connecticut, he says.

    (Signed) GILBERT SMITH.
        Sworn to, before me at Valparaiso,
          this eighteenth day of June, 1824.

    (Signed) MICHAEL HOGAN,
        U. S. Consul.

The examination of the others who came in the ship, was but a
repetition of the foregoing. All, however, concurred in believing,
that Joseph Thomas was privy to the intention to mutiny, and murder
the officers.

The ship was then furnished with necessary sails and rigging, and
placed in charge of a Captain King, who brought her to the Island of
Nantucket, arriving on Sunday 21st November, 1824. Another examination
was held before Josiah Hussey, Esq. and all testified, as before the
American Consul at Valparaiso.

Thomas, who was put in irons as soon as the land was discovered, was
arraigned before the above named justice, and after an elaborate
hearing, the prisoner was committed to jail, to take his trial at the
following term of the U. S. District Court, and the witnesses
recognised in the sum of three hundred dollars each.

Leaving Thomas, awaiting his trial, and the others in the enjoyment of
the society of their families and friends, we will return to the
Mulgrave Islands, the scene of no inconsiderable portion of our
distresses and adventures.

On the 17th Feb. when night came, the watch was set consisting of two
men, whose duty it was to guard against the thefts of the natives. At
about 10 P. M. all hands were awakened by the cry; "The ship has gone,
the ship has gone!" Every one hastened to the beach and verified the
truth of the report for themselves. Some who were ignorant of the
intention of Smith and others, to take the ship, were of opinion that
the strong breeze then blowing, had caused her to drag her anchor, and
that she would return in the morning.

The morning came, but nothing was to be seen upon the broad expanse
of ocean, save here and there a solitary seagull, perched upon the
crested billow. Payne in a paroxism of rage, vented the most dreadful
imprecations; swearing that could he get them once more in his power,
he would put them to instant death. Not so with us; a ray of hope shot
through our minds, that this circumstance might be the means of
rescuing us from our lonely situation.--The writers of this narrative
were upon the most intimate terms, and frequently, though carefully,
sympathized with each other upon their forlorn situation. We dare not
communicate our disaffection to the Government of the two surviving
mutineers, (Payne and Oliver,) to the others, fearing they might not
agree with us in opinion, and we had too good reason to believe, that
there was _one_, who although unstained by blood, yet from his
conduct, seemed to sanction the proceedings of the mutineers.

The natives assembled in great numbers around the tent, expressing
great surprise at the ship's having left,--Payne gave them to
understand that the wind had forced her to sea, and that from her want
of sails, rigging, &c. she must be lost, and would never return.--The
natives received the assurance with satisfaction, but it was evident,
Payne apprehended her safe arrival at some port, and his own
punishment; for we were immediately set to work, to tear one boat to
pieces, for the purpose of raising upon another, which was to have _a
deck_; Payne, alleging as a reason for this, that the natives might
compel us to leave the Island. We leave the reader to judge, however,
of his motives, while we proceed to give an account of what actually
did transpire.

The natives in considerable numbers continued to attend us, and while
the work was progressing, exhibited a great deal of curiosity. Their
deportment towards us continued to be of the most friendly nature,
continuing to barter with us, giving us bread fruit, cocoanuts, &c.
for which they received in return, pieces of iron hoop, nails, and
such articles as we could conveniently spare.

The small Islands of this groupe are frequently only separated by what
are sometimes denominated causeways, or in other words, connected by
reefs of coral, extending from the extreme point of one Island and
connecting it with another. These reefs are nearly dry at low water,
and the communication is easily kept up between them by the natives on
foot.

On the 19th, in the morning, having obtained permission, several of us
left the tent, travelling to the Eastward.--After crossing upon the
causeways to several adjacent islands, we discovered numerous tracks
of the natives in the sand, and having followed them about seven
miles, came to a village consisting of about twenty or thirty
families; and were received by them with great hospitality. They
presented us with bread fruit and the milk of cocoanuts, while the
wonder and astonishment of those who had not as yet seen us,
particularly the women and children, were expressed by the most
uncouth grimaces, attended with boisterous laughter, and capering
around us. What more particularly excited their astonishment was the
whiteness of our skins, and their mirth knew no bounds when they heard
us converse.

Early on the morning of the 20th, we were ordered to go to work upon
the boat; but at the request of a number, this duty was dispensed
with, and we permitted to stroll about the Island. A number went to
the village, carrying with them muskets, at the report of which and
the effect produced by the balls, the natives were struck with wonder
and astonishment. The reader will no doubt agree with us when we
pronounce this to have been a bad policy, for they certainly disliked
to have visitors possessed of such formidable and destructive weapons.
They however continued to visit the tent without discovering any
hostile intentions, and we continued to put the utmost confidence in
them, or more properly speaking to live without any fear of them.

I (William Lay,) left the tent on a visit to the village, where I was
received with the same kindness as before.--An old man between 50 and
60 years of age, pressed me to go to his house and tarry during the
night, which I did.--The natives continued in and around the tent
until a late hour, gratifying their curiosity by a sight of me. I was
provided with some mats to sleep upon, but the rats, with which the
Island abounds, prevented my enjoying much sleep.

At 10 o'clock I took my leave of them, with the exception of a number,
who accompanied me to the tent.

Silas Payne and John Oliver, together with two or three others, set
out in one of the boats, for the purpose of exploring the Island, and
making new discoveries, leaving the rest of us to guard the tent. They
were absent but one night, when they returned, bringing with them two
young women, whom Payne and Oliver took as their wives. The women
apparently showing no dissatisfaction, but on the contrary appeared
much diverted. Payne now put such confidence in the natives, that he
dispensed with having a watch kept during the night, and slept as
secure as though he had been in his native country.

Payne, on awaking near morning, found the woman that he had brought to
live with him was missing. After searching the tent, and finding
nothing of her, concluded she had fled. He accordingly armed himself,
together with John Oliver and Thomas Lilliston, (with muskets,) and
set out for the nearest village, for the purpose of searching her out.
They arrived at the village before it was light, and secreted
themselves near an Indian hut, where they awaited the approach of day,
in hopes of seeing her. Accordingly at the approach of day-light, they
discovered the hut literally thronged with natives, and among the
number, they discovered the woman they were in search of. At this
moment one of them fired a blank cartridge over their heads, and then
presented themselves to their view, which frightened the natives in
such a manner that they left the hut and fled. Payne then pursued
after, firing over their heads till he caught the one he wanted, and
then left the village for his own tent.--On arriving at the tent, he
took her, gave her a severe flogging and then put her in irons, and
carried on in this kind of style until he was by them killed, and
called to render up his accounts to his offended Judge.

This severity on the part of Payne, irritated the natives, and was
undoubtedly the cause of their committing depredations and theft, and
finally murdering all our remaining crew, excepting myself and Hussey.

Early on the succeeding morning, it was discovered that the tool chest
had been broken open, and a hatchet, chisel, and some other articles,
purloined by the natives. Payne worked himself into a passion, and
said he would be revenged. During the day he informed a number of the
natives of what had been done, (who signified much regret at the
circumstance,) and vowing vengeance if the articles were not returned.
During this day the natives frequented the tent more than they had
ever done before; and at night one of them came running with _one
half_ of the chisel which had been stolen, it having been broken in
two.

Payne told them it was but half of what he required, and put the
Indian in irons, signifying to him, that in the morning he must go
with him to the village, and produce the rest of the articles, and
also point out the persons engaged in breaking open the chest. The
poor native seemed much chagrined at his confinement; yet his
companions who remained near the tent during the night, manifested no
dissatisfaction, which we could observe.

In the morning, Payne selected four men, viz: Rowland Coffin, Rowland
Jones, Cyrus M. Hussey, and Thomas Lilliston, giving them each a
musket, some powder and _fine shot_; declining to give them balls,
saying, the report of the muskets would be sufficient to intimidate
them. The prisoner was placed in charge of these men, who had orders
to go to the village, and recover the hatchet and bring back the
person whom the prisoner might point out as the thief.

They succeeded in getting the hatchet, but when about to return, the
natives in a great body, attacked them with stones. Finding that they
retreated, the natives pursued them, and having overtaken Rowland
Jones, killed him upon the spot. The remainder, although bruised with
the stones which these Islanders had thrown with great precision,
arrived at the tent with the alarming intelligence of a
difficulty;--while they followed in the rear armed for war!

No time was lost in arming ourselves, while the natives collected from
all quarters, and at a short distance from the tent, seemed to hold a
kind of council. After deliberating some time, they began to tear to
pieces one of the boats.

These were of vital importance to our guilty commander, and he
ventured to go to them for the purpose of pacifying them. One of the
Chiefs sat down upon the ground with him, and after they had set a few
moments, Payne accompanied the Chief into the midst of the natives.
After a conference with them which lasted nearly an hour, he returned
to the tent, saying that he had pacified the natives upon the
following conditions. They were to have every article belonging to us,
even to the tent; and Payne had assured them of his willingness, and
that of the others to live with, and be governed by them, and to adopt
their mode of living! We have reason to doubt the sincerity of Payne
in this respect, for what was to us a hope which we cherished with
peculiar pleasure, must have been to him, a source of fearful
anticipation--we mean the probable safe arrival of the ship, in the
U. S. which should result in our deliverance. Our situation at this
time was truly alarming; and may we not with propriety say,
distressing? Surrounded by a horde of savages, brandishing their war
clubs and javelins, our more than savage commanders, (Payne and
Oliver) in anxious suspense as to the result of their negociations
with them; no refuge from _either foe_, and what contributed not a
little to our unhappiness, was a consciousness of being innocent of
having in the least manner wilfully aided the destroyers of the lives
of our officers, and the authors of our now, truly unhappy situation.

The natives now began to help themselves to whatever articles suited
them, and when some of them began to pull the tent down, an old man
and his wife took hold of me, and after conducting me a few rods from
the tent, sat down, keeping fast hold of my hands. Under the most
fearful apprehensions I endeavoured to get from them, but they
insisted upon detaining me. I endeavoured to console myself with the
idea, that gratitude had prompted them to take care of me, as I had
frequently taken the part of this old woman, when she had been teased
by others; but alas! the reflection followed, that if this was the
case, there was a probability that not only my bosom friend, was about
to be sacrificed, but I should be left alone to drag out a weary
existence, with beings, strangers to the endearing ties which bind the
hearts of civilized man.

Whether Payne and his associates offered any resistance to the course
now pursued by the natives or not, I do not know. Suffice it to say,
that all at once my ears were astounded with the most terrifying
whoops and yells; when a massacre commenced but little exceeded by the
one perpetrated on board the Globe. Our men fled in all directions,
but met a foe at every turn. Lilliston and Joe Brown (the Sandwich
Islander,) fell within six feet of me, and as soon as down, the
natives macerated their heads with large stones. The first whom I saw
killed, was Columbus Worth. An old woman, apparently sixty years of
age, ran him through with a spear, and finished him with stones!

My protectors, for now they were truly so, shut out the scene by
laying down upon the top of me, to hide me from the view of the
merciless foe! I was however discovered, and one of the natives
attempted to get a blow at me with a handspike, which was prevented by
them; when, after a few words, he hurried away.

As soon as the work of death had been completed, the old man took me
by the hand and hurried me along towards the village. My feet were
very much laccerated in passing over the _causeways_ of sharp coral
rock, but my conductor fearing we might be pursued, hurried me onward
to the village, where we arrived about noon. In a few minutes the
wigwam or hut of the old man, was surrounded, and all seeming to talk
at once, and with great excitement, I anticipated death every moment.
Believing myself the sole survivor, the reader must pardon any attempt
to describe my feelings, when I saw a number of the natives
approaching the hut, and in the midst, Cyrus M. Hussey, conducted with
great apparent kindness.

Notwithstanding we had both been preserved much after the same manner,
we could not divest ourselves of the apprehension, that we perhaps had
been preserved, for a short time, to suffer some lingering death.

Our interview was only long enough to satisfy each other that we alone
survived the massacre, when we were separated; Hussey being taken
away, and it seemed quite uncertain, even if our lives were spared,
whether we ever saw each other again.




CHAPTER IV.


On the following day, however, accompanied by natives, we met at the
scene of destruction, and truly it was an appalling one to us. The
mangled corpses of our companions, rendered more ghastly from the
numerous wounds they had received, the provisions, clothing, &c.
scattered about the ground, the hideous yells of exultation uttered by
the natives, all conspired to render our situation superlatively
miserable.

We asked, and obtained leave from our masters, to bury the bodies
which lay scattered about. We dug some graves in the sand, and after
finishing this melancholy duty, were directed to launch the canoes,
preparatory to our departure, (for we had come in canoes) when we
begged permission, which was readily granted, to take some flour,
bread and pork, and our respective masters assisted us in getting a
small quantity of these articles into the largest canoe. We also took
a blanket each, some shoes, a number of books, including a bible, and
soon arrived at the landing place near the village. As the natives
seemed desirous of keeping us apart, we dare not make any inquiries
for each other, but at my request, having boiled some pork in a large
shell, Hussey was sent for, and we had a meal together; during which
time, the natives assembled in great numbers, all anxious to get a
sight, not only of our _novel mode of cutting the meat and eating it_,
but of the manner in which we prepared it. One of them brought us some
water in a tin cup, as they had seen us drink frequently when eating.

The natives now began to arrive from distant parts of the islands,
many of whom had not yet heard of us, and we were continually
subjected to the examination of men, women and children. The _singular
colour_ of our skin, was the greatest source of their admiration, and
we were frequently importuned to adopt their dress.

On the 28th Feb. early in the morning the whole village appeared to be
in motion. All the adults commenced _ornamenting_ themselves, which to
me appeared to render them _hideous_. After greasing themselves with
cocoanut oil, and hanging about them numerous strings of beads, they
set off, taking us with them, to a flat piece of ground, about half a
mile distant, where we found collected a great number, and all
ornamented in the same fantastic manner.--Knowing that many of the
natives inhabiting Islands in the Pacific Ocean, are cannibals, we
were not without our fears that we had been preserved to grace a
feast! Our apprehensions, however, were dissipated, when we saw them
commence a dance, of which we will endeavour to give the reader some
idea. The only musical instrument we saw, was a rude kind of drum; and
the choristers were all females, say twenty or thirty, each having one
of these drums. The music commenced with the women, who began upon a
very low key, gradually raising the notes, while the natives
accompanied them with the most uncouth gesticulations and grimaces.
The precision with which about three hundred of these people, all
dancing at a time, regulated their movements, was truly astonishing;
while the yelling of the whole body, each trying to exceed the other,
rendered the scene to us, not only novel, but terrifick.

The dance ended near night, and those natives who lived in a distant
part of the Island, after gratifying their curiosity by gazing upon
us, and even _feeling of our skins_, took their departure.

After our return to the village, we cooked some meat upon the coals,
and with some bread, made a hearty meal. One source of regret to us,
was, that the natives began to like our bread, which heretofore they
had scarcely dared to taste; and particularly the woman whom I called
mistress, ate, to use a sea phrase, her _full allowance_.

The natives expressed great dislike at our conversing together, and
prohibited our reading, as much as possible. We never could make them
comprehend that the book conveyed ideas to us, expressed in our own
language.

Whether from a fear that we might concert some plan of escape, or that
we might be the means of doing them some injury while together, we
know not;--but about the first of April, we discovered that we were
about to be separated! The reader may form some idea of our feelings
when we were informed that Hussey was to be taken by his master and
family, to a distant part of the Island! Not having as yet become
sufficiently acquainted with their language, we were unable to
comprehend the distance from our present location.

It now becomes expedient to present the reader with our _separate
accounts_, in which we hope to be able to convey an idea of the
manners and customs of these people. We had experienced in a very
short time so many vicissitudes, and passed through so many scenes of
distress, that no opportunity was afforded to keep a journal, and
notwithstanding we had even lost the day of the week and month, yet
with such force, were the principal incidents which occurred during
our exile, impressed upon our minds, that we can with confidence
proceed with our narrative, and will commence the next chapter with an
account of the adventures of _William Lay_.




CHAPTER V.


Early in the morning of the day on which Hussey left me, preparations
were made for his embarkation with his _new_ master and family. We
were allowed a short interview, and after taking an affectionate leave
of each other, we parted with heavy hearts. The tender ties which
bound me to my companion in misfortune, seemed now about to be forever
broken asunder. No features to gaze upon, but those of my savage
masters, and no one with whom I could hold converse, my heart seemed
bursting with grief at my lonely situation.--On the departure of my
companion, the "star of hope" which had often gleamed brightly mid the
night of our miseries, seemed now about to set forever! After watching
the canoe which bore him from me, until she was hid from my view in
the distance, I returned to the hut with my master, and as I had eaten
but little during the day, the calls of nature induced me to broil my
last morsel of meat, with which, and some bread, I made a tolerable
supper. The natives began to be very fond of the bread, and eat of it
as long as it lasted, which unfortunately for me, was but a short
time.

I informed my master that I should like to have some more of the meat
from the place where the ship had lain. On the following morning, my
master, mistress, and four or five others embarked in a canoe, to
assist me in procuring some provisions. Observing that they carried
with them a number of clubs, and each a spear, I was apprehensive of
some design upon my own person; but happily, was soon relieved, by
seeing them wade round a shoal of fish, and after having frightened
them into shoal water, kill a number with their spears. We then
proceeded on, and when we arrived at the _tent_, they cooked them
after the following manner. A large fire was kindled, and after the
wood was burned to coals, the fish were thrown on, and snatched and
eaten as fast as cooked; although they were kind enough to preserve a
share for me, yet the scene around me, prevented my enjoying with
them, their meal. The tent which had been torn down, had contained
about forty barrels of beef and pork, two hogsheads of molasses,
barrels of pickles, all the clothing and stores belonging to the ship,
in short, every thing valuable, such as charts, nautical instruments,
&c. &c. The latter had been broken and destroyed, to make ornaments,
while the beef, pork, molasses and small stores lay scattered
promiscuously around. They appeared to set no value upon the clothing,
except to tear and destroy it. The pieces of beef and pork, from the
barrels, (which had been all stove,) were scattered in every
direction, and putrifying in the sun. After putting into the canoe
some pork and a few articles of clothing, we commenced our
return;--but a strong head wind blowing, we had considerable
difficulty in getting back.

For some considerable time, nothing material occurred, and I led as
monotonous and lonely a life, as could well be imagined. It is true, I
was surrounded by fellow beings; and had all hope of ever seeing my
country and friends again, been blasted, it is probable I might have
become _more_ reconciled to my condition, but I very much doubt if
ever perfectly so, as long as reason and reflection held their empire
over my mind. My books having been destroyed from a superstitious
notion of their possessing some supernatural power, I was left to
brood over my situation unpitied and alone.

Sometime in July, as I judged, _Luckiair_, son-in-law to my master,
_Ludjuan_, came from a distant part of the groupe, on a visit, and
during the week he remained with us, we became much attached to each
other. When he told me, that on his return he should pass near the
place where Hussey lived, my anxiety to accompany him thus far, was so
great, that after much persuasion, _Ludjuan_ gave his consent for me
to go. On our way we stopped at the tent, and I procured for the last
time, a small quantity of the _ship's provisions_, although the meat
was some of it in a very decayed state.

In consequence of head winds, we were compelled to stop for the night
upon a small Island, where we found an uninhabited hut; and after
cooking some meat, and baking some wet flour (for it was no other) in
the ashes, we took our mats into the hut, and remained until next day.
The wind continuing to blow fresh ahead, we gathered some green bread
fruit, and cooked some meat, in the same manner as they cook the
largest of their fish, which is this.--A hole is dug in the ground,
and after it has been filled with wood, it is set on fire, and then
covered with stones. As the wood burns away, the heated stones fall to
the bottom, which, when the fire is out, are covered with a thick
layer of green leaves, and then the meat or fish is placed upon these
leaves, and covered again in a careful and ingenious manner, and the
whole covered with earth. This preserves the juices of the fish, and
in this way do they cook most of their fish, with _hot stones_.

In the afternoon the weather proving more favourable, we left our
encampment, and at sun down arrived at a place called Tuckawoa; at
which place we were treated with the greatest hospitality. When we
were about to leave, we were presented with bread fruit and cocoanuts
in great abundance. As we approached the place of Hussey's residence,
I discovered him standing on the beach. Our joy at meeting, I will not
attempt to describe.--We had a short time, however, allowed us, in
which to relate our adventures, and condole with each other; for in
_an hour_ we were once more separated; and we pursued our course for
the residence of Luck-i-a-ir. After encamping another night upon the
beach, we at length arrived at the house of my conductor, which was at
a place called _Dillybun_. His family consisted of his wife and one
child, whom we found busily engaged in making a fishing net. When near
night _Luckiair_ and myself went out and gathered some breadfruit, and
after making a hearty meal, slept soundly upon our mats until morning.

A little before noon on the following day, two natives with their
wives, arrived from Luj-no-ne-wort, the place where Hussey lived, and
brought me some flour, and a piece of meat. The natives would eat of
the bread, but would not taste of the meat. I remained here about a
week, when _Ludjuan_ came for me. Nothing occurred of note, during our
passage back to _Milly_, (the place of my residence,) where I was
welcomed by the natives with every demonstration of joy. I was sent
for by one of the chiefs, who asked many questions, and as a mark of
his friendship for me, when I was about to return, presented me with a
kind of food called _cha-kak-a_. My present consisted of a piece about
two feet long and six inches in diameter. It is made of a kind of
fruit common among these Islands, and called by the inhabitants,
_bup_. The fruit is scraped very fine, and then laid in the sun until
perfectly dry. Some of the leaves of the tree bearing the fruit, are
then wrapped round a piece of wood, which is the _mould or former_,
and when securely tied with strings, the former is withdrawn, and into
this cylinder of leaves is put the _bup_, which is of a sweet and
pleasant taste.

At the urgent request of the natives, I now adopted their dress.
Having but one pair of trowsers and a shirt left, I laid them by for
bad weather, and put on the costume of a Mulgrave Islander. This
dress, if it may be so called, consists in a broad belt fastened round
the waist, from which is suspended two broad tassels. The belt is made
from the leaves of the _bup tree_, and very ingeniously braided, to
which is attached the tassels, which are made of a coarser material,
being the bark of a small vine, in their language called _aht-aht_.
When the dress is worn, one of the tassels hangs before and the other
behind. The sun, as I expected, burned my skin very much; which the
natives could not account for, as nothing of the kind ever happened
among themselves.

One day there was seen approaching a number of canoes, which we found
were loaded with fish for the chiefs, and to my great joy, Hussey was
one of the passengers. My master accompanied me to see him; and we
anticipated at least a mental feast in each other's society. But of
this enjoyment we were deprived by the natives, who were always uneasy
when we were conversing together.

I learned, however, from Hussey, that the natives had been kind to
him; but before we had an opportunity to communicate to each other our
hopes and fears, he was hurried away. Having now gained considerable
knowledge of their language, I learned that they were afraid that if
we were permitted to hold converse, we should be the means of
provoking the _Supreme God_, _Anit_, to do them some injury.

The bread fruit beginning to ripen, we were all employed in gathering
it; and I will endeavour to give the reader an idea of the process of
preserving it. After the fruit was gathered, the outside rind was
scraped off, and the seeds taken out; which are in size and appearance
like a chesnut. The fruit is then put into a net, the meshes of which
are quite small, taken into the salt water, and then beat with a club
to pummice. It is then put into baskets made of cocoanut leaves, and
in about two days becomes like a rotten apple; after which the _cores_
are taken out, and the remainder after undergoing a process of
kneading, is put into a hole in the ground, the bottom and sides of
which are neatly inlaid with leaves, and left about two days; when it
again undergoes the same process of kneading, and so on, until it
becomes perfectly dry.--This occupied us a number of days; and when we
were engaged in gathering another, and a larger kind, a small boy came
running towards us, and exclaimed, "_Uroit a-ro rayta mony la
Wirrum_," that is, the chiefs are going to kill William. Ludjuan
seeing that I understood what the boy said, he said "reab-reab!" it is
false. From the pains taken by the natives to keep Hussey and myself
apart, it was evident that they were in some measure afraid of us;
but from what cause I had yet to learn. After passing a sleepless
night, we again in the morning pursued our labors, but I was
continually agitated by fearful apprehensions. About midnight I
overheard some of the natives in the tent talking about me, and I was
now convinced that some injury was contemplated. I then asked them
what I was to be killed for. They seemed surprised when I told them I
had been listening; yet they denied that I was to be killed, and one
of them who had frequently manifested for me much friendship, came to
my mat, and lay down with me, assuring me I should not be injured.

The harvest being ended, a feast was had, and the chiefs were
presented with considerable quantities of this fruit, after it had
been prepared and baked, which in taste resembled a sweet potatoe,
sending presents of it in all directions about the Island.

Having now but little work to do, I confined myself to the hut as much
as possible, for I had been observed for some time in a very
suspicious manner. In a few days I was informed that Hussey had been
brought to the Island, and it was immediately suggested to my anxious
mind, that we were now to be sacrificed. Ludjuan went with me to see
Hussey, but we were only allowed a few moments conversation, when I
was taken back to the hut, and communicated my fears to my old
mistress, who sympathized with me, but said if the chiefs had
determined it, there was no hope for me. I now was made acquainted
with the cause of their dislike, which was no less than a
superstitious idea, that we were the cause of a malady, then raging to
considerable extent!

This disease consisted in the swelling of the hands and feet, and in
many instances the faces of the youth swelled to such a degree, that
they were blind for a number of days. Such a disease they had never
before been afflicted with. I had now an opportunity of most solemnly
protesting my total inability to injure them in this way, and as the
disease had as yet caused no death, I had a hope of being spared. I
learned that a majority of the chiefs in council, were for putting me
to death, but one of them in particular, protested against it, fearing
it might be the cause of some worse calamity. As the vote to carry
into effect any great measure, must be unanimous, this chief was the
means by his dissenting, of saving my life.

The afflicted began to recover, and my fears were greatly lessened;
but as these people are of a very unstable and changeful character, I
could not entirely divest myself of apprehensions.

As soon as the harvest was completed, great preparations were made for
the embarkation of the chiefs, who were going to make their annual
visit to the different Islands. They told me that the King, whom they
called La-boo-woole-yet, lived on an Island at the N. W. and if he did
not receive his yearly present of preserved bread fruit and _pero_, he
would come with a great party to fight them. Twelve canoes were put
in the water, each one carrying a part of the provisions, and manned
by about two hundred persons.

After an absence of four or five days, during which time we exchanged
civilities with numerous chiefs, we returned to _Milly_, and hauled up
the canoes. I now learned that the principal chief, had said that it
would have been wrong to kill me, firmly believing that the disease
with which they had been afflicted, had been sent by their God, as a
punishment for having killed Payne and the others! The malady having
now entirely disappeared, they considered that crime as expiated!

About two days after my return, there was great excitement, in
consequence of the appearance of a ship! Seeing the natives were very
much displeased at the circumstance, I concealed as well as I could,
the gladdening emotions which filled my breast; and, surrounded by
about three hundred of them, went round a point of land, when I
distinctly saw a ship standing for the land. The displeasure of the
natives increased, they demanded to know where she came from, how many
men she had in her, &c. I was compelled to tell them that she was not
coming to get me, and even pretended to be afraid of her approach,
which pleased them much, as they appeared determined I should never
leave them. At dusk she was so near the land, that I saw them shorten
sail, and fondly anticipated the hour of my deliverance as not far
distant.

During the night, sleep was a stranger to me, and with the most
anxious emotions did I anticipate a welcome reception on board, and
above all, a happy and joyful landing on my native shore. In the
morning, Ludjuan went with me to the beach, but alas! no ship was in
sight. She had vanished, and with her had fled all my hopes of a
speedy deliverance. The kind reader can perhaps form some idea of my
disappointment.

The natives continued to be kind to me, and I was often complimented
by them for my knowledge of their language; and the appearance of my
person had very much improved, my hair and beard being long, and my
skin turned nearly as black as their own! I was often importuned to
have my ears bored and stretched, but never gave my consent, which
much surprised them, it being a great mark of beauty. They begin at
the age of four years, and perforate the lower part of the ear, with a
sharp pointed stick; and as the ear stretches, larger ones are
inserted, until it will hang nearly to their shoulders! The larger the
ear, the more beauty the person possesses!

About a fortnight after I saw the ship pass, Hussey came with his
master, on a visit. His disappointment was great, and we could only
cheer each other, by hoping for the best, and wait patiently the
pleasure of Heaven.

Hussey again left me, but we parted under less bodings of evil than
before, for the kindness of the natives began to increase, and their
suspicions to be allayed.

I will here acquaint the reader with some of the means that I was
induced to make use of, to satisfy the cravings of appetite. As the
Island now was in a state of almost entire famine, my daily
subsistence not amounting to more (upon an average) than the substance
of one half a cocoanut each day. The chief I lived with, having
several cocoanut trees that he was very choice of, and which bore
plentifully; I would frequently, (after the natives in the hut were
all soundly asleep) take the opportunity and get out of the hut
unperceived, and climb one of those trees, (being very careful about
making the least noise, or letting any of them drop to the ground,
whereby I might be detected,) and take the stem of one cocoanut in my
mouth, and one in each hand, and in that manner make out to slide down
the tree, and would then (with my prize) make the best of my way to a
bunch of bushes, at a considerable distance from the hut, where I
would have a sumptuous repast; and if any remained, would secrete
them, until by hunger, I was drove to the necessity of revisiting that
place.

I made a practice of this for some time, until the chief began to miss
his cocoanuts, and keep such watch, that I, for fear of being
detected, was obliged to relinquish that mode of satisfying my
appetite.

A short time after this, I ventured to take a cocoanut off the ground
where the natives had recently buried a person; a deed which is
strictly against the laws of their religious principles, (if it can be
said that they have any,) and a deed which the natives never dare to
do, for fear of displeasing their God (Anit) under a certain length of
time after the person had been buried, and then, the spot is only to
be approached by males.

Not twenty-four hours had elapsed after I took the cocoanut, before
they missed it, and coming immediately to me, charged me with having
taken it, telling me that not a native on the Island would have dared
so much as to handle it, for fear of the bad spirit, (Anit.)

I then told them that I had taken it, but pleading ignorance in the
case, and promising never to do any thing of the like again, and
making it appear to them that I was surprised at what they told me of
the bad spirit, and also that I believed the same, they left me, after
telling me that if I ever handled another of them, it would not only
bring sickness and death upon myself, but would bring it upon the
whole Island.

The reader will naturally suppose, that my mind was considerably
relieved on their leaving me so soon, fearing that something serious
might be the result.

After this I was very careful how I did any thing that I thought would
in the least displease, or irritate them, and made myself content with
the portion they saw fit to give me.

I frequently fired a musket to please them, by their request; and
told them if they would let me have some powder, I would fire off the
swivel, left by the Globe. They consented, and collected in great
numbers, and after I had loaded the gun with a heavy charge, I told
them they had better stand back. They said I must set her on fire, and
tell them when she was going off, and they would run! I however,
touched her off, when they instantly fell on their faces in the
greatest panick. When their fears had subsided, they set up howling
and yelling with ecstacy!

They said, if they should have a battle, I must carry that gun with
me, which would alone vanquish their enemies!

We were visited by eight or ten canoes, from a distant Island, called
Alloo. They came to exchange presents with our chiefs, and very soon a
great quantity of _pero_, &c. was baked, and having been inspected by
the chiefs, to see that it was in a proper state to be presented to
their visitors, it was given them to eat.

As these people had never seen me before, I was much annoyed by them.
During their stay, I was constantly surrounded; my skin felt of, and
often became the sport of the more witty, because my skin was not of
so dark a hue as their own, and more especially, as my _ears_ remained
in the same form, as when nature gave them to me. These visitors, to
my great satisfaction, did not remain long with us.

Their mode of anchoring their canoes is singular. One of them takes
the end of a line, and diving to the bottom, secures it to a rock; and
in the same way do they dive down to cast it off. I have seen them do
this in five fathoms of water.




CHAPTER VI.


It was not until the 23d of December, 1825, that the prospects of
being relieved from my disagreeable situation began to brighten.
Early in the morning of that day, I was awakened by a hooting and
yelling of the natives, who said, a vessel had anchored at the head of
the Island. They seemed alarmed, and I need not assure the reader,
that my feelings were of a contrary nature. Their God was immediately
consulted, as to the measures to pursue; but as I was not allowed to
be present when he was invoked, I cannot say what was the form of this
ceremony, except that cocoanut leaves were used. Their God, however,
approved the plan, which was, that they should go to the vessel, or
near her, and swim on board, a few at a time, until two hundred were
on board, and then a signal was to be given, when they were to throw
the persons on board into the water, and kill them. Two large canoes
which would carry fifty men each, were put in readiness, but at first
they refused to let me accompany them, fearing that I would inform of
their having killed our men, and they would be punished. I assured
them that the vessel, having but two masts, did not belong to my
nation, and I was certain I could not speak their language.

They at length consented for me to go. We arrived within a few miles
of the vessel at night, and early the following morning, were joined
by a number of canoes, which made in all two hundred men. It being
squally in the forenoon, we remained where we were, but when it
cleared up, the yells of the Indians announced the approach of the
vessel. I had only time to see that it was really an armed schooner,
when I was secreted with their women, about forty in number, in a hut
near the shore, and the women had orders to watch me close, that I did
not get away.

A boat at this time from the schooner, was seen approaching the shore.
She landed at about a hundred yards distant from where I was confined;
but it being near night, I soon found she was making the best of her
way towards the schooner. Night came, and I was sent for by the
principal chief, and questioned closely concerning the schooner. My
fears and apprehensions were now excited to a degree beyond human
expression, and the kind reader will pardon all attempts to express
them.

The natives seeing the whites so bold, excited in them a fear which
induced them to flee the Island. Accordingly, about midnight, the
canoes were launched, and I was carried to a remote part of the
Island, a distance of about 40 miles, where I remained until my
fortunate escape.

29th. Early in the morning, we discovered a boat under sail, standing
directly for the place where we were; the natives were considerably
agitated with fear, and engaged in planning some method by which to
overcome the people in the boat, if they should come where we were;
and, as I expected, the natives would hide me, as they had heretofore
done, I thought it best to offer my services to assist them--I said I
would aid them in fighting the boat's crew--and that, as I could talk
with them, I would go to them, in advance of the natives, deceive the
crew, and prevail on them to come on shore and sit down, and for us to
appear friendly till in possession of their arms, then rise upon the
crew and kill them without difficulty or hazard. Some of the natives
suspected that I should revolt to the other party, and turn the
current of destruction on them; but the chief Luttuon said he liked my
plan much, and would inquire of their God, and if he found that I
should be true to them, my plan should be adopted. The inquiry
resulted in favor of my plan, and they said I might go. The boat was
now within one hundred rods of the shore, and Luttuon called me to
him, oiled my head and body with cocoanut oil, and gave me my charge
how to conduct. I pledged myself to obey his orders. My joy at this
moment was great, as the boat anchored near where we were. I went to
the beach, accompanied by about one hundred of the smartest natives,
whom I charged not to manifest a hostile appearance. I hailed the boat
in English, and told the crew what the calculations of the natives
were, and not to land unless they were well armed. The officer of the
boat replied that he would be among them directly; and in a few
minutes they landed, (13 men and 2 officers,) and when within a rod of
us, I ran to Lieut. H. Paulding, who took me by the hand, asked if I
was one of the Globe's crew, and inquired my name, &c. &c. We then
retreated to the boat, facing the natives, who all kept their seats,
excepting the one I called father, who came down among us, and took
hold of me to carry me back, but desisted on having a pistol presented
to his breast.

Lieut. Hiram Paulding, of the Navy, for such was the name of this
gentlemanly officer, informed me that the vessel, was the U. S.
Schooner Dolphin, sent on purpose to rescue us, and commanded by
Lieut. Com't. John Percival.

After expressing my gratitude as well as I was able, to Heaven, which
had furnished the means of my deliverance, I acquainted Mr. Paulding,
that the only survivor of the Globe, except myself, was Cyrus M.
Hussey; who was held in bondage upon a neighbouring Island. After the
boat's crew had taken some refreshment, we left the landing place, and
soon arrived at the place where Hussey lived. The natives had
concealed him, but after some threatenings from us, restored him, and
we were received on board of the Dolphin, and treated in the most kind
and hospitable manner.

Our hair was now cut, and we were shaved. Our appearance must have
been truly ludicrous, our hair having been growing twenty-two months,
untouched by the razor or scissors.

Our joy and happiness on finding ourselves on board an _American
Man-of-War_, and seeing "the star spangled banner," once more floating
in the air, we will not attempt to describe. Suffice it to say, that
none can form a true estimate of our feelings, except it be those who
have been suddenly and unexpectedly rescued from pain and peril, and
threatening death. In the afternoon the Captain wished me to go on
shore with him, as an interpreter. We accordingly went, and passed
over to the village on the other side of the Island, where we had an
interview with a woman of distinction, (the men having fled, being
principally absent with the chiefs at Alloo.) The captain informed her
he wished to see the chiefs, and requested her to send for them that
night, that he might visit them in the morning, and make them some
presents. We then returned to the vessel; and the following day, Dec.
1st, went on shore for the purpose of seeing the chiefs, but could not
obtain an interview with them. The captain informed the natives that
he must see the chiefs, and that he would wait another day, but if
disappointed then, he should be compelled to use coercive means. They
immediately sent another messenger after them, and we returned on
board, accompanied by several of the natives, among whom was Ludjuan.
The captain made him several presents, and informed him they were
given as a compensation for saving my life. Shortly after, the natives
went on shore.

The next morning, Dec. 2d, the captain sent me on shore, to ascertain
whether the chiefs had returned, and I was informed by the natives
that they had, and were then at a house half a mile distant. This
intelligence having been communicated to the captain, he went on
shore, and took myself and Hussey for interpreters; but we found on
our arrival, that the natives had been practising a piece of
deception--the chiefs not having returned. Very much displeased at
this perfidious treatment, the captain made a demand of the chiefs
before sunset, threatening, if it were not complied with, to go on
shore with fifty men, well armed, and destroy every person he could
find. This threat threw the natives into consternation, and
immediately another messenger was despatched for the chiefs. The
natives were so alarmed, that they soon sent off three or four more
messengers; and we returned on board to dine. After dinner, I went on
shore with Mr. Paulding, the first Lieutenant, and some of the under
officers, for the purpose of shooting birds. After rambling round the
Island for some time, we discovered a number of natives quickly
approaching us from the lower part of the Island; and supposing the
chiefs were with them, we sat down to await their arrival; but before
they came to us, a signal was set on board the schooner, for us to
return, which was immediately obeyed, without waiting for an interview
with the natives. Early on the next morning, I was sent ashore to
ascertain whether the chiefs had arrived, and soon found that they
had, and were in a hut, waiting to receive a visit from the captain,
who, I informed them, would come on shore after breakfast, to have a
_talk_ with them, and also to bestow some presents. Accordingly, the
captain, with myself and Hussey, repaired to the hut, where we found
them sitting, and ready to commune with us.

The captain told them he had been sent out by the _Head Chief_ of his
country, to look for the men that had been left there by the ship
Globe--that he had been informed they murdered all but two--that, as
it was their first offence of the kind, their ignorance would plead an
excuse--but if they should ever kill or injure another white man, who
was from any vessel or wreck, or who might be left among them, our
country would send a naval force, and exterminate every soul on the
Island; and also destroy their fruit trees, provisions, &c. and that
if they would always treat white men kindly, they never would receive
any injury from them, but would have their kindness and hospitality
reciprocated. He also adverted to the practice of stealing, lying, and
other immoralities; stating to the natives that these crimes are
abhorred and punished in our country; and that murder is punished
with death. He then sent me to the boat, lying at the beach, to bring
three tomahawks, one axe, a bag of beads, and a number of cotton
handkerchiefs, which were presented to the chiefs. He also gave them
two hogs, and a couple of cats, with injunctions not to destroy them,
that they might multiply. The captain caused potatoes, corn, pumpkins,
and many valuable seeds to be planted, and gave the natives
instructions how to raise and preserve them. He then explained to them
that these acts of kindness and generosity were extended, because they
saved us alive, and had taken care of us while among them. This
conversation with the natives being ended, we went on board, dined,
and the captain and Hussey went again on shore. The first Lieutenant
made preparations for cruising in the launch, round the Island, to
make topographical surveys, who took me with him, as interpreter, and
about 4 o'clock, we commenced a cruise with a design to sail up an
inlet or inland sea; but the wind blowing fresh, and having a head
sea, at 12 o'clock we anchored for the night.

Dec. 4th. At sunrise, we found ourselves not more than a mile from the
place where we crossed over the evening before; and immediately
getting under weigh, and rowing to the westward, we soon came to the
place where the Globe's station had been; anchored, and went on shore,
for the purpose of disinterring the bones of Comstock, who had been
buried there, and to obtain a cutlass, which was buried with him; but
before we had accomplished the undertaking, the schooner got under
weigh, and soon anchored abreast of us, at the same place where the
Globe's provisions were landed. The captain and Hussey immediately
came on shore to view the place; but as I caught cold the preceding
night, by lying exposed in our launch, I was excused from serving
further with Mr. Paulding in making surveys, and Hussey supplied my
place. Soon after, I went on board with the captain, carrying with me
the skull of the person we had dug up, and the cutlass, intending to
convey them to America.

After dinner, the captain made a trip in the gig, to Alloo, taking me
for his interpreter, where we arrived in half an hour, and soon
travelled up to the village. The natives received us with marks of
gladness, and in a short time the house at which we stopped was
surrounded by them, who came undoubtedly for the purpose of gratifying
their curiosity, by gazing at us. We remained at the village about two
hours, during which time we had considerable talk with two of the
chief women, and made some small presents to the people, such as
beads, &c. They did not treat us as they usually do visitors, with
fruit, &c. there being at that time what we call a famine, which in
their language, is Ingathah.

After having taken leave of the natives, and walked about half the
distance to the shore, we stopped to refresh ourselves under a fine
cool shade. While in conversation on the manners and customs of the
natives, an old man and woman approached us, who had acted towards me,
during my residence among them, as father and mother. I immediately
made them and their kindness to me known to the captain, who, in
consideration of their humane treatment, rewarded them with a few
beads and a handkerchief, for which they appeared thankful and
grateful--telling them at the same time, the presents were to
recompense their hospitality to me, and enjoining on them at all times
to be friendly to the whites, and a reward would certainly await them.
It being near the close of the day, we left Alloo, and having a fair
wind, reached the schooner before dark.

The next morning, Dec. 5th, being very pleasant, all hands were
employed in procuring wood for the schooner--some in cutting it down,
and others in boating it off. Our carpenter had been engaged for a
few days, at Milly; to instruct and assist the natives in repairing a
canoe. The distance was four or five miles, and the captain wanting
the carpenter, set sail for Milly in his gig, and soon arrived there;
where he learned that the carpenter had repaired the canoe, to the
great satisfaction of the natives, who expressed a strong desire that
he might be permitted to remain among them on the Island; but the
captain informed them he could not spare him. When the natives saw the
carpenter packing up his tools, they expressed to me an expectation
that the tools would be left with them as a present. We left the
natives, and reached the schooner a little before sunset; the captain
feeling anxious for the fate of the launch, as nothing yet had been
heard of the fortune which had attended her, or the men in her.

Dec. 6th. Having procured a sufficient supply of wood, though our
supply of provisions was hardly sufficient for the voyage, and the
launch having returned, at about 10 A. M. we weighed anchor and
proceeded to the place called Milly, where we anchored for the purpose
of planting some seeds, and taking a last farewell of the chiefs and
their people. The captain went immediately on shore, taking Hussey for
his interpreter. He was gone till nearly night, when he returned,
bringing with him _Luttuon_ and several other natives. The captain
gave orders to beat to quarters, to exhibit the men to the natives,
and explain to them the manner of our fighting. Those untutored
children of nature, seemed highly gratified with the manoeuvres, but
were most delighted with the music, probably the first of the kind
they ever heard. We informed them we always have such music when we
are fighting an enemy. The natives were then landed, and we
immediately made sail for the head of the Island, intending to cruise
around the other shores of it, for the purpose of making surveys, and
constructing a map of it. We stood eastward till nearly morning, then
altered our course and headed towards the Island.

During the following day, Dec. 7th, having favorable winds and
weather, we made a regular survey of the whole length of the groupe,
before sunset.--The captain now steered N. W. to endeavour to discover
other Islands which the natives had often described to me, during my
abode with them. They said they had frequently visited ten or twelve
different Islands in their canoes, and that the people who inhabit
them, all speak the same language, which is the same as their own, and
that the Islands lie about one day's sail from each other.

Dec. 8. The weather pleasant and fair; about 9 o'clock, A. M. we saw
land ahead, and passed it on the windward side, then varied our course
and sailed to the leeward of the Island; but night coming on, we were
obliged to defer landing till morning. The captain then attempted to
reach the shore in the gig, but was not able to land, on account of
the surf. After he returned on board, we made sail, cruising farther
to the leeward, in hopes of finding a place to anchor, but in this we
were disappointed, not being able to find bottom thirty yards from the
rocks. However, at high water, the captain, at imminent hazard in
passing the surf, succeeded in landing. He had previously given orders
to me and Hussey, not to let the natives know that we could converse
with, or understand them, but to be attentive to every thing that
might pass among them, to ascertain whether their intentions and
dispositions were hostile or friendly. After landing, the captain and
Hussey visited the house where the head chief, or king of all those
Islands lived, of whom I had formerly heard so much, while I was on
the Mulgraves.--They continued with him about two hours, were treated
well, and discovering nothing unfriendly in the natives, the captain
told Hussey he might make them acquainted with his knowledge of their
language, by conversing with them. The king, on hearing Hussey
speaking in the language of the natives, appeared at first so
frightened and agitated, that he could scarcely reply; but by degrees
became composed, and inquired of Hussey where he learned their
language, and why he had not spoken to them immediately on coming
ashore. Hussey then informed him he was one of the two persons that
had been on the Mulgraves, (in their language, Milly,) and that the
other person (myself) was on board the schooner--that the schooner had
been there after us, that we left the Mulgraves the day before, and
had then visited that Island for the purpose of examining it, &c. &c.
The king had long before heard of our being at the Mulgraves, and told
Hussey he had been repairing his canoe, in order to go to those
Islands, with a view to induce us to live with him, who, had that been
the case, would undoubtedly have used us well. The king was about 70
years of age, and had a daughter on the Island where we had resided,
wife to Luttuon. He inquired if his daughter was alive and well, with
tears in his eyes and trembling form, for it was a long time since he
had received any intelligence of her; and hearing of her welfare so
unexpectedly, quite overcame the good old father's feelings. And here
the reader will observe, that the pure and unaffected emotions
produced by parental affection, are similar among all the human
species, whether civilized or savage. The natives of the Island we
were then visiting, may be ranked with those that have made the fewest
approaches towards the refined improvements of enlightened nations,
yet the ground work of humanity was discovered to be the same; and the
solicitude of a fond father for a beloved child, was manifested in a
manner which would not disgrace those who move in the most elevated
circles of civilized life. The old king expressed his regret that he
had not visited the Mulgraves during our stay there, was very sorry we
were about to return to America, and used all the force of native
eloquence, to persuade us to continue with him. He inquired if we had
got the whale boat he had heard of our having at the Mulgraves. Hussey
informed him it was on board the schooner, and the swivel likewise.
The captain then informed the king that he wanted cocoanuts and bup,
which were obtained; and in return, the captain gave the natives some
beads and handkerchiefs. The captain then went on board the schooner,
made sail, standing a N. W. course, in pursuit of another Island.

Dec 9th. About 10 o'clock in the forenoon, we discovered land ahead
and off our lee bow. About 2 o'clock, P. M. we arrived near the land,
hove the schooner to, and sent two boats ashore, to get provisions. At
sunset the boats returned, loaded with cocoanuts and bup. We hoisted
up our boats, and with a strong breeze, it being the inclement season
of the year, prosecuted our voyage to the Sandwich Islands, & had much
boisterous weather during the passage.

On Jan. 8th, 1826, we expected to make one of the Sandwich Islands,
called Bird's Island, but night came on before we discovered it. But
early on the following morning, we saw land about four leagues to the
leeward, and bore down to the Island for the purpose of sending a boat
ashore, to kill seals.--We arrived near the landing place, hove to,
and the captain with six men went ashore in the whale boat. We now
stood off from the shore for about an hour, then tacked and stood in,
for the boat to come off. The wind had increased to almost a gale, and
continuing to blow harder, when we were within a quarter of a mile of
the Island, not discovering any thing of the boat, we veered off
again, and continued tacking till night came on, but saw nothing of
the boat or her crew. About 9 or 10 o'clock, the wind abated, and we
found ourselves two leagues to the leeward of the Island, where we lay
to all night under easy sail, anxiously waiting for the approach of
morning, in hopes then to learn the fate of the captain and men who
had gone on shore. At length the horizon was lighted by the dawn of
day, which was succeeded by the opening of a very pleasant morning. We
immediately made all sail for the Island, but having a head wind, we
did not arrive at the landing till near the middle of the day. A boat
was sent on shore to learn what had befallen the crew of the whale
boat, and shortly returned with all the men except the captain and one
man that could not swim. We ascertained, that in attempting to come
off through the surf, they were swamped and lost their boat. We a
second time sent the boat ashore with means to get the captain and
other man, who were soon brought on board. We now made sail and
steered our course for Woahoo, one of the Sandwich Islands, and
nothing very material occurring on our passage, we anchored in the
harbour of that Island on the 14th. On the 16th procured a supply of
fresh provisions. On the 19th, Hussey and myself went on shore for
the purpose of rambling round the Island, but nothing occurred worthy
of notice.

Our foremast being found rotten a few feet below the top, it was
deemed necessary to take it out for repairs, which required the daily
employment of the carpenter and others for some time.--On the 27th,
the captain received a letter, giving intelligence that the ship
London had been driven ashore at an Island not far distant from
Woahoo.--As the Dolphin's foremast was out, the captain was under the
necessity of pressing the brig Convoy, of Boston, and putting on board
of her about 90 of his own men, taking with him 2 of his lieutenants
and some under officers, he sailed to the assistance of the ship
London.

Feb, 3d, the brig Convoy returned laden with a part of the cargo of
the London, and the specie which was in her at the time of her going
ashore, under the command of our 2d lieutenant, leaving the remainder
of her cargo in another vessel, under the command of Capt. Percival.

Feb. 5th. The captain returned with the residue of the London's
cargo, and the officers and crew of that ship. After the cargo of the
London had been secured, we were employed in finishing the repairs on
our foremast, which were completed on the 21st; and we commenced
rigging.

Feb. 26th. On the morning of this day, permission was granted to a
number of our crew, to go on shore. In the afternoon, Hussey and
myself went and took a walk. About 4 or 5 o'clock, I observed a great
collection of natives, and on inquiring the reason, learned that
several of the Dolphin's crew, joined by some from other ships lying
in port, had made an assault upon Mr. Bingham, the missionary, in
consequence of ill will towards that gentleman, strongly felt by some
of the sailors, but for what particular reason, I did not distinctly
ascertain. They carried their revenge so far, that they not only
inflicted blows upon Mr. Bingham, but attacked the house of a chief.
The natives, some with cutlasses, and others with guns, repelled the
unjustifiable attack; and during the affray, several of our men were
slightly injured, and one badly wounded, whose life was despaired of
for some time. The offenders were arrested, sent on board, and put in
irons.

On the next day, 27th, Mr. Bingham came on board with the captain and
witnesses against the men engaged the preceding day, in the assault on
shore. After a fair examination of evidence in the case, the
aggressors were properly punished, and ordered to their duty.--The
whale ships now began to arrive for the purpose of recruiting, and for
some particular reasons, several of the captains of those ships
requested captain Percival to remain at the Island as a protection to
them, till they could obtain the necessary supplies, and resume their
cruises. From the present date, nothing of importance occurred that
would be interesting to readers, till April 3d, when great
preparations were made on board the Dolphin, to give a splendid
entertainment to the young king. The gig and second cutter were
employed in the morning, to borrow signals from the different ships in
the harbour, in order to dress out the schooner in a fanciful style.
About 11 o'clock, the gig and second cutter were sent ashore for the
king and several chiefs and natives of distinction, who were soon
conveyed on board. The yards were manned, and a general salute fired.
After partaking of as good a dinner as our resources and the means
within our reach would afford, the king and his attendants were
disembarked under the honour of another salute.--During the remainder
of this month, the events which transpired, were principally of an
ordinary cast, and not thought worthy of record.

May 3d. This day we were employed in bending sails; and from this date
to the 11th, the necessary preparations were made to commence our
homeward voyage. This day (11th,) the pilot came on board, and for
the last time we weighed our anchors in the harbour of Woahoo. While
retiring from the shore we were saluted with 21 guns from the fort. We
hove about, returned the salute, and then resumed our destined course,
and bid a last adieu to Woahoo, after a tedious and protracted stay of
about four months.

From the time of our departure, on the 11th of May, from Woahoo,
nothing of importance transpired till the 12th of June. On the morning
of this day we discovered the Island Toobowy; and at 9 o'clock saw a
sail, which proved to be a whale ship. At half past 2 came to anchor
at a convenient place near the Island, and sent a boat ashore, which
returned at night with two natives, who gave us a description of the
harbour, and directions how to enter it; and as our mainmast was
injured, we entered it to make the necessary repairs. On the 13th, we
beat up the harbour, and at 3 o'clock anchored, where we continued
repairing our mast, and procuring wood and water, till the 22d; when
we weighed anchor and made sail for Valparaiso, favoured with fine
weather and good winds. July 18th, made the Island of Massafuero, and
passed it about midnight. On the 19th, in the forenoon, made the
Island of Juanfernandez; and at 11 P. M. on the following day,
discovered the land at the south of Valparaiso. On the 22d, beat up
the harbour, and at 2 o'clock on the morning of the 23d, came to
anchor.--At Valparaiso, we learned that the frigate United States was
at Callao; and after getting a supply of provisions, we sailed for
Callao on the 9th of August, and arrived on the 24th. Here we found
the United States, lying under the Island of Lorenzo, with several
English ships of war.

On the 26th, the Dolphin in company with the United States, passed
over to Callao; and Sept. 1st, I and the crew of the Dolphin were
transferred to the United States.

Sept. 10th. All the men that had been transferred from the Dolphin to
the United States, had liberty to go to Lima; at 12 o'clock we went on
shore, and at 4 P. M. entered the gates of the city. I employed my
time while on shore, in roving about the city, and viewing the various
objects it presents; and on the 13th returned on board the United
States. We were detained here till the 16th of December, when we
sailed for Valparaiso, and having a pleasant passage, arrived on the
6th of January, where we were happy to find, for our relief, the
Brandywine. From the 8th to the 24th, all hands were engaged in
preparing the ship for her homeward voyage; when at 9 o'clock we
weighed our larboard anchor, and at 1 P. M. were under sail, passing
out of the harbour, when the Cambridge, (an English 74,) then lying in
the harbour, gave us 3 cheers, which we returned with 3 times 3; she
then saluted us with 13 guns, which we returned with the same number,
and then proceeded to sea.

Being favoured with fine weather and good winds, we had a prosperous
voyage to Cape Horn, and arrived off the pitch on the 7th of Feb. and
passed round with a pleasant breeze. In prosecuting our voyage home,
off the mouth of the river Rio de la Plata, and along the coast of
Brazil, we had rough weather and thick fogs. On the 6th we made the
land and harbour of St. Salvador, and about 9 o'clock came to
anchor.--On the 7th we fired a salute for the fort, which was
returned.

We were now employed in watering our ship, and making other
preparations for continuing our voyage homeward; and on the 15th got
under weigh, with a fine breeze.

April 1st. At 10 o'clock, made the Island of Barbadoes, and at 1 P. M.
came to anchor, where we lay till 5 P. M. on the 3d, when we got under
weigh, and sailed down the Island to St. Thomas, where we sent a boat
ashore, and after transacting the business for which we stopped, made
sail on the 9th for the port of New-York. On the 21st, made the
highland of Neversink; at 2 P. M. took a pilot on board, but owing to
fogs and calms, did not arrive to the port of destination till 1 P. M.
next day, when we anchored opposite the West Battery, with a thankful
heart that I was once more within the United States.




CHAPTER VII.


I will now proceed to give the reader some account of the Islands I
visited, and of the manners and customs of the natives, and shall
endeavour to be as candid and correct as possible.

The Mulgrave Islands are situated between 5 and 6 degrees north
latitude, and between 170 and 174 degrees of east longitude. They are
about 50 miles in length, and lie in the form of a semi-circle,
forming a kind of inland sea or lake; the distance across it being
about 20 miles. The land is narrow, and the widest place is probably
not more than half a mile. On the north side of the group are several
inlets or passages, of sufficient depth to admit the free navigation
of the largest ships; and if explored, excellent harbours would in all
probability be found. In the inland sea are numerous beds of coral,
which appear to be constantly forming and increasing. These coral beds
are seen at low water, but are all overflowed at high tide. The whole
group is entirely destitute of mountains, and even hills, the highest
land not being more than six feet above the level of the sea at high
water. By the accounts given me from the natives, it appears that some
parts have been overflowed by the sea. Their being so low, makes the
navigation near them very dangerous in the night, both because they
would not be easily seen, and because the water is very deep quite to
the shores; and a place for anchoring can scarcely be found on the
outside of the Island.

The air of these Islands is pure, and the climate hot; but the heat
is rendered less oppressive by the trade winds, which blow constantly,
and keep the atmosphere healthful and salubrious for so low a
latitude.

The soil, in general, is productive of little besides trees and
shrubs, and most of it is covered with rough coral stones.

The productions are breadfruit in its proper season, and cocoanuts,
which they have throughout the year; and a kind of fruit different
from any that grows in America, which the natives call Bup--all
growing spontaneously. Of the leaves of the trees the women
manufacture very elegant mats, which they wear as blankets and
clothing; of the bark of a vine they make men's clothing; and of the
husks of the cocoa they make ropes and rigging for their canoes, and
for almost every other purpose. The waters round the Islands abound
with fish, and the natives are very expert in catching them.

There are no animals on the Islands, excepting _rats_; and by these
little quadrupeds they are literally overrun.

The number of all the inhabitants, men, women, and children, is
probably between five and six hundred.

The following may be given as prominent characteristics of the
natives.--They are in general, well made and handsome--very indolent
and superstitious. They are morose, treacherous, ferociously
passionate, and unfriendly to all other natives. When they are not
fishing, or otherwise employed, they are generally travelling about,
and visiting each other. They have no salutations when they meet, but
sit down without exchanging a word of civility for some minutes; but
after a silent pause, the head of the family, if there is any thing in
the house to eat, presents it to his guests, who, when they have eaten
sufficiently, if there are any _fragments_ left, are very careful to
secure them and carry them off when they return home; and the host
would regard it as an imposition, if his visitors were to neglect this
important trait of politeness, and fashionable item in etiquette.
They accustom themselves to frequent bathing; and commence with their
children on the day of their birth, and continue the practice twice a
day, regularly, till they are two years old. They do this to
invigorate the system, and render the skin of their children thick and
tough by exposure. Their living consists simply of breadfruit,
cocoanuts, and bup; but cocoanuts are all they can depend on the year
round--the two other articles being common only a part of the year.

Their diversions consist in singing, dancing, and beating time with
their arms, in a manner similar to the amusements of the natives at
the Sandwich Islands; in which they appear to take great delight.

They wear their hair long, and tie it up in a kind of bow on the top
of the head, and this is all the covering they have for their heads.
The men have long beards. One part of their dress makes a singular and
ludicrous appearance, which resembles two _horse tails_ suspended
from the waist, one before and the other behind. The women's dress
consists of two mats, about the size of a small pocket-handkerchief,
which they tie round them like an apron.

I never saw any form of marriage among them, but when a couple are
desirous of being united, their parents have a talk together on the
subject, and if the parties all agree to the union, the couple
commence living together as man and wife; and I never knew of an
instance of separation between them after they had any family. In a
few instances polygamy prevailed.

The following will give a pretty correct idea of their funeral rites
and solemnities:

When a person dies, the inhabitants of the village assemble together,
and commence drumming and singing, halloing and yelling; and continue
their boisterous lamentations for about 48 hours, day and night,
relieving each other as they require. This they do, because they
imagine it is diverting to the person deceased. They bury the body at
a particular place back of their houses, and use mats for a coffin.
After the ceremony of interment is performed, they plant two cocoanut
trees, one at the head and the other at the feet of the buried person.
But if the trees ever bear fruit, the women are prohibited from eating
thereof, for fear of displeasing the bad spirit, _Anit_. And here it
may not be inappropriate to remind the reader that Eve ate of the
forbidden fruit, notwithstanding she knew it would displease the GOOD
SPIRIT.

In their personal appearance, the natives are about the middle size,
with broad faces, flat noses, black hair and eyes, and large mouths.

In relation to literature, they are as ignorant as it is possible for
people to be, having not the most distant idea of letters.

Concerning the religion of the untaught natives of the Mulgraves, the
following remarks will give all the knowledge I am in possession of:

They believe there is an invisible spirit that rules and governs all
events, and that he is the cause of all their sickness and
distress;--consequently they consider him to be a very bad being.--But
they have no belief in a good spirit, nor have they any modes of
worship.--It is a prevalent opinion among them, when any are sick,
that the bad spirit rests upon them; and they believe that particular
manoeuvres and a form of words, performed round and said over the
sick, will induce _Anit_, the bad spirit, to cease from afflicting,
and leave the unfortunate sufferers. With regard to a future state of
existence, they believe that the _shadow_, or what survives the body,
is, after death, entirely happy; that it roves about at pleasure, and
takes much delight in beholding everything that is transacted in this
world;--and as they consider the world as an extensive plain, they
suppose the disembodied spirits travel quite to the edge of the skies,
where they think white people live, and then back again to their
native Isles; and at times they fancy they can hear the spirits of
departed friends whistling round their houses, and noticing all the
transactions of the living. Singular as some of these notions and
opinions may appear, there is much to be met with in Christendom
equally at variance with reason; and I have heard from the pulpit, in
New-England, the following language: "I have no doubt in my own mind
that the blessed in Heaven look down on all the friends and scenes
they left behind, and are fully sensible of all things that take place
on earth!"




CHAPTER VIII.


This chapter, and the concluding remarks of the narrative, will be
collated from a Journal kept by Cyrus M. Hussey; and if there appear
occasionally some incidents similar to those recorded in the preceding
account, it is believed the value and interest of this history will
not be diminished by them.--Hussey commences thus:

About the last of April, myself and Lay were separated, destined to
different Islands, not knowing whether we should ever see each other
again. At night we arrived at an Island, and hauled up our canoe. We
found but few natives, but among the number was the mother of the
chief with whom I lived. She was very inquisitive respecting me, and
talked so incessantly through the night that I could not sleep. The
next morning we were employed in gathering breadfruit, for the purpose
of curing it for the winter. This employment continued about three
months, during which time I was very uneasy about my situation. At
intervals of leisure, when the old chief had no particular engagements
to engross his attention, he would launch his canoe and go and search
for fish; but my shoes having been taken from me, whenever I was
employed round the rough shores of the Island, my feet were so wounded
that I could hardly walk. The natives now commenced the destruction
of my clothing, and not being able to converse with them, I found it
very difficult to preserve my apparel. They often requested me to
divest myself of my clothing, and dress as they did, or rather not
dress at all. I made signs that the sun would burn me, if I should
expose myself to its scorching rays. When they found that persuasion
would not induce me to divest myself of clothing, they began to
destroy my clothes, by tearing them in pieces. It was some time before
I could understand their language, so as to inform them that the sun
would burn my back; and being robbed of my clothes, the powerful
influence of the sun soon scorched me to such a degree that I could
scarcely lie down or take any rest.

About the latter part of July, William Lay and others came to the
Island in a canoe, to see me, being the first interview we had enjoyed
since our separation, which was about three months previous. Lay
informed me that the natives had taken his bible from him and torn it
up, and threatened his life. He informed me that it seemed to him as
though he was robbed of that comfort which none in a christian land
are deprived of. We were soon parted; he in a canoe was taken to an
Island by the natives called _Dilabu_, and I went to my employment,
repairing a canoe which was on the stocks. After I had finished the
canoe, the natives prepared a quantity of bread fruit and fish for the
chiefs, and on the following morning we set sail for an Island called
_Milly_, one of the largest in the group, at which resides the
principal chief. We arrived just at night and were cordially received
by the natives, who had assembled on the beach in great numbers, for
the purpose of getting some fish which the old chief had brought with
him. He then hauled his canoe on shore; and I had again the pleasure
of seeing my fellow sufferer, William Lay, after a month's separation.
Since our first meeting we were not allowed to converse much together.

The old chief tarried at this Island but a short time, and Lay and
myself were once more separated. The old chief, his family, and
myself, returned to the Island which we had left two or three days
before, called, in the language of the natives, _Tabarawort_; and he
and his family commenced gathering bread fruit. As the old man with
whom I lived had charge of several small Islands, we found it
difficult to gather the fruit as fast as it ripened, so that a
considerable part fell to the ground and perished. In the mean time,
while we were employed in gathering in the fruits of the earth, news
came to the Island, to inform the chief with whom I lived, that it was
the intention of the highest chiefs to destroy us both, (that is
myself and Lay,) because a severe sickness prevailed among them, and
they being superstitious, supposed we were the occasion of it. I
informed them that _we_ could not have been the cause of the sickness,
as no such sickness prevailed in our country, and that I never before
had seen a similar disease. But still they talked very hard about us;
and the highest chief sent to the chief I lived with, to have me
brought to the Island of Milly, where Lay lived, in order that we
might be killed together. Preparations having been made, the old
chief, whom I called father, with his family and myself, set sail the
next morning for Milly, where we arrived about sun set. He immediately
went to see the chief of Milly, to inquire the circumstances relating
to the necessity of taking our lives, leaving me and the rest of the
family in the canoe. I shortly perceived William Lay and his master
coming towards the canoe, which produced sensations hard to be
described. Affectionate and sympathizing reader, what must have been
our feelings and conversation at that moment, when nothing seemingly
was presented to our view but _death_? We were allowed an interview of
only a few minutes, when we were again separated.

My master soon returned to the canoe, and entered into very earnest
conversation with his family, which, at the time, I did not fully
understand; but found afterwards it was a relation to his family of
his interview with the natives on the subject of taking our lives; and
that if they killed me, they would first have to kill him, (my
master,) which they were unwilling to do. My kind old master told them
he had preserved me, and always should. Night now coming on, I lay
down to sleep, but fear had taken such possession of my mind, that the
night was spent in wakeful anxiety.

The next morning I asked leave of my master to visit Lay, which he
readily gave. I set out for the hut in company with my master's son;
but on approaching it, Lay called out to me, to inform me that I must
not come--that the natives did not like to have us together. On my
turning to go back, Lay's master called to me to come. I went and sat
down, and entered into conversation with Lay, to ascertain what the
intention of the natives towards us were. He told me it was the
design of the high chief to kill us. I observed to him, that we were
in the hands of the natives; still there was a higher and more
powerful Hand that could protect us, if it were the Divine pleasure so
to do. I then bade him farewell, and returned to the canoe, never
expecting to see each other again till we should meet on the tranquil
ocean of eternity.

My master being now ready to return to his Island, the canoe was
launched, and we set sail, and arrived the same night, having been
absent two days.--The natives expressed much joy on seeing me return,
and asked many questions respecting the chief of Milly; but as I was
unable to speak their language intelligibly, I could give them but
little information. We then went on with our work as usual, which was
fishing, &c. &c.

After having been at this Island some time, my master's wife
manifested an inclination to go and visit her friends, who lived at an
Island called in their language _Luguonewort_. After a successful
excursion in fishing, we cooked a part, and took some breadfruit, and
embarked, agreeably to the wishes of my master's wife, and arrived at
Luguonewort in two days. The natives of that Island gave us a cordial
reception. We hauled up our canoe and remained some time among them.
After our agreeable visit was ended, we returned to the other Island,
found the natives well, and that good care had been taken by the
chief's mother, an old woman to whom the superintendence of things had
been left.

About six months after the massacre of my shipmates, the brother of
the native in whose possession I was, came to the Island, and informed
us that a ship had been seen to pass a day or two before, and that it
caused great disturbance among the chiefs--that they thought it was
the ship that left the Islands, (the Globe,) and that she was in
search of us. My old master immediately prepared his canoe to visit
the chiefs, and he wanted also to inquire of me what I thought
respecting the ship. We loaded our canoe and made sail for Milly,
where the chiefs were. We arrived at night, and found a great number
of natives collected on the beach, to see if we had any fish. We
hauled up our canoe for the night, and the natives began to question
me about the ship.--I told them I did not know, concluding it would be
good policy to say but little on the subject. The natives crowded
round me in great numbers; and I did not see Lay till he came to me. I
inquired of him what he had seen, and he informed me that there had
been a ship in sight about half an hour before sun set, and that she
was near enough for him to see them take in their fore and mizen top
gallant sails, but could give no definite account of her, as she was
soon out of sight. We were not allowed to be together long; and I went
to rest as usual, but could not sleep.--"Hope springs eternal in the
human breast"--and hope that the ship which had been seen had come to
deliver us from savages and transport us to our native country and
dear friends, had an influence on my feelings more powerful than
sleep, and imagination was busy through the night in picturing scenes
of future happiness.

But the prospect of our being released from our unpleasant situation
was not very flattering. Early next morning I asked and obtained
permission from my master, to pay a visit to Lay, before passing round
to the opposite side of the Island. Accompanied by my master's son and
several others, I went to the hut where Lay lived, and we had the
pleasure of another interview; but it was of short duration, for we
were not allowed to be together more than a quarter of an hour. I
returned to my master's canoe, and there continued till the middle of
the day; we then launched and set sail for _Tabanawort_, where we
arrived the fore part of the night.--Early next morning we prepared
for a fishing cruise, had pretty good success, and returned just
before night, made a fire, cooked some fish, and ate a delicious
supper.

Our canoe being leaky and very much out of repair, my master and I
commenced taking her to pieces, for the purpose of re-building her;
and we were occasionally employed upon her nearly two months, when we
launched her, and commencing fishing business, had alternately good
and bad success. One day we had the good fortune to enclose, in a kind
of wear made for the purpose, a large quantity of fishes, and with a
scoopnet we caught a plentiful supply. After cooking them, we set out
with a quantity to dispose of to the chiefs of Milly, where we arrived
before night, on the same day of sailing. Very soon after our arrival
I saw Lay and his master approaching the canoe, and we once more had a
short but pleasant interview. I inquired of Lay how he fared, as to
food, &c. His reply was, better than he expected, and that the natives
were kind to him, always giving him his part. I informed him I had a
basket of fish reserved for him as a present, which he requested me to
keep till dark, that he might be enabled to carry them home without
having them all begged by the natives. He came at night for the fish,
and I retired, agreeably to my master's wishes to sleep in the canoe,
to prevent the natives from stealing the remainder of the fish that
were on board. The next morning my master was highly pleased to find
that nothing was missing; and gave me liberty to go and see Lay. I
went to the hut and found him with his master. They gave me a cordial
welcome, and presented me with some cocoanuts in return for the fish.
Lay's master inquired of me very particularly respecting my master,
and the quantity of fish we caught. I then returned to the canoe,
carrying the cocoanuts, to deposite in the hold. My master asked me
where I got them; I told him Lay's master gave them to me. If this
minute detail should appear unimportant to the reader, he may draw a
moral from it; for it evinces that my master was like other masters,
desirous to know if his servant came honestly in possession of the
cocoanuts. He then ordered me and his son to launch the canoe, which
we did, got under sail for the Island we left the day before, and
arrived back at night. We learned that during our absence the natives
had caught a considerable quantity of fish; and in a few days we
caught a large quantity more; loaded our canoe, and embarked for one
of the head Islands to pay a visit, where we stopped some time. On our
return, we commenced catching a kind of fish called by the natives
_kierick_. They are about the size of a small codfish; and the manner
of taking them is very curious--they make a line of the husk of
cocoanuts, about the size of a cod line; they then in the canoe pass
round the fish to the windward of the flat, then lie to till a
considerable quantity of them get on the flat, then square away by the
wind and run down and go round the flat with this line, and thus
catch them, men, women, and children being employed. I have known
them catch one hundred at a draught. The fish are afraid of the line,
and when enclosed, taken by a scoopnet. After taking a sufficient
quantity, they go on shore to prepare for cooking them, which is done
by digging a large hole in the earth, filling it with wood, covered
with stones. The wood is then consumed, which heats the stones--the
fish are wrapped in leaves to prevent them from falling to pieces,
then covered with green leaves, and cooked by the heat of the stones.
About an hour is required to cook them sufficient for eating. Their
manner of curing fish, is, to split them and dry them in the sun,
without using salt. Thus cured, they will keep some time. While we
were employed in fishing, Lay came to the Island, in company with a
native, to visit me; but did not stay long, for the chief sent for
him, fearing, as I afterwards found out, that they should lose us.
From some hints that had been dropped, a report had got in
circulation that my master and Lamawoot, (Lay's master,) intended to
leave their Islands, and embark for an Island to the north west, where
the king lived, and carry us with them as a great curiosity. Lay was
carried back to the chiefs--the head one sent an express to my master
and Lay's to come and see him--they made preparations and set sail for
Milly; where they were closely questioned respecting their going to
the other Island, &c. &c. They denied that they had even intimated any
such design; which was false, for I had frequently heard them talking
on the subject myself, but kept silent, as it appeared to be a great
crime for any to desert their Islands; and I feared the consequences
of making it known.--They then parted in peace and friendship, and I
and my master returned to our habitation.

We then went to an Island to catch fish, and a disagreement taking
place between two of the natives, about some trifling affair, the
particulars of which I did not learn, one of them took a spear
belonging to the other, and after breaking it across his knee, with
one half of it killed his antagonist, and left him. The parents of the
man killed, being present, laid him out on some mats, and appeared to
regret their loss very much. They kept a continual drumming over the
body of the deceased for two or three days; after which he received a
decent burial on another Island at some distance from the Island where
he was killed.




CHAPTER IX.


Having a successful fishing voyage, we loaded our canoe, and carried
our cargo to the chiefs of _Luguonewort_. I had the satisfaction of an
interview with Lay; but our provisions being soon exhausted, we were
obliged to go again in search of fish. At this time there was a severe
drought, and breadfruit trees suffered extremely, many of them
entirely died. The superstitious natives supposed the drought was sent
upon them as a judgment, because myself and Lay were allowed to live.
I informed them that we could neither make it rain nor prevent it; but
some of them were so ignorant that they believed we could control the
weather. But some of the chiefs thought the drought was visited upon
them because they had killed our shipmates, and I was always ready to
join with them in that opinion. The drought continued about four
months with such severity that most of the breadfruit trees on the
small Islands were so completely dried up that they never sprouted
again. Many of the ignorant natives still insisted that their sickness
and drought were occasioned by suffering us to live upon their
Islands; but this gross ignorance was counterbalanced by most of the
chiefs, who believed differently, and to their more liberal opinion we
are indebted for our lives.

About this time the Islands were refreshed by plentiful showers of
rain, and the natives assembled at Milly to sing for the breadfruit to
come in abundance. They said their singing would please _Anit_, and
that he would reward them with a very great crop.

A disturbance existed between the high chief and his brother
_Longerene_. The disagreement lasted about nine months, during which
time the two brothers did not see or speak to each other. _Luttuon_,
the high chief, then sent a canoe to inform his brother _Longerene_
that he wished to see him. An interview took place, and a treaty of
peace was ratified.

During our stay at Milly, I had frequent opportunities of seeing Lay,
my fellow sufferer; but the only relief we could afford each other was
derived from a sympathy of feelings, and in conversations relating to
our homes and native country, by blending our mutual wishes for a safe
return, &c. &c. The reader can hardly conceive the unpleasantness of
our situation at this time--the famine was so great that the tender
branches of trees were cooked, and the nutricious juice drank as food.
My strength was so reduced in consequence of being deprived of my
usual quantity of provisions, that I was unable to accompany my master
on a fishing voyage. When my master returned, he found me lying in the
hut, and asked me what was the matter. I informed him my indisposition
proceeded from hunger; he cooked a fish and gave me, which, though it
afforded me some relief, was not half enough to satisfy the cravings
of appetite.

After I had recruited my strength, one day while engaged in fishing, a
canoe came to the Island; and as soon as the canoe was near enough for
the natives in her to be heard, they commenced hallooing and making
dreadful noises, which is their practice when war is declared. They
informed us that the high chief had killed several of the lower chiefs
who belonged to the Island called Alloo; that _Longerene_ had fled to
Alloo, his own Island; and that the high chief was determined to
pursue and kill him. We were ordered to go immediately to his
assistance; accordingly we set sail for the Island Milly, where we
found a great number of natives collected for war. Again I had the
satisfaction of being with Lay; who informed me that they were going
to fight the other party at Alloo; and that the high chief had told
him that he and I must prepare two muskets, and go and fight with
them. Luttuon sent for me and Lay, and informed us he was about to
have a battle, and that we must prepare to take a part in it. We asked
him if he had any powder--he said he had a plenty, and showed us a
small box, which contained a little powder and mustard seed mixed
together, which, if it had been good powder, would not have made more
than five or six charges. We told him it was good for nothing; but he
said we must do the best we could with it. As we were afraid to offend
him, we went to work with the powder, and dried it in the sun, and
prepared our muskets for battle.--The next morning we launched 15 or
16 canoes, containing in all about 200 natives, and set sail for
Alloo; where we arrived and landed, and proceeded to a village in
order to give battle to the enemy. On learning that the chief of Alloo
and his family had fled in a canoe, we returned to our canoes, made
sail in pursuit of the chief, but did not overtake him. After
returning and spending a day or two at the Island of Alloo, we
launched our canoes and went to our respective homes, and heard no
more of the war.

Some time after my master returned to the Island where we usually
resided, a canoe came and brought the information that a vessel was
anchored near one of the head Islands--that she carried guns on each
side, and had a hundred men--that they (the natives that brought the
news) had been on board of the vessel, and received presents of beads,
which they had on their necks. The natives said the vessel was not
like our ship which we came in, but had only two masts. I told them
we had vessels of all descriptions, some with one mast only. They said
the men on board did not look like us, and that they were very saucy.
I informed the natives the vessel was a war vessel, and that if
molested by the natives, they would shoot them. The natives said they
would take the vessel and kill all the men on board. I told them their
safety consisted in friendship, and that any hostile attack on the
crew of the schooner would lead to their own destruction.--They then
set sail for Milly, to inform the chiefs of the arrival of the vessel
at the head Island. The chiefs of Milly gave orders to launch the
canoes, 15 in number, to go and take the schooner. These canoes were
manned by 200 natives. My master's canoe not being in perfect repair,
we could not join the party. On the night of the 25th, (Nov.) we saw
several of the canoes returning towards the Island where I was. From
one of the canoes landed the high chief, who began to question me
respecting the vessel. I told him I had not seen the vessel, and of
course could not tell much about her; but that I expected she had come
after me and Lay, and that she would have us. He then said he had
better kill us both, and then there would be no one to tell that the
natives had killed the rest of our crew. I told him that the people on
board the schooner knew there were two alive, and if they killed us,
the crew of the vessel would kill all the natives. This appeared to
perplex his mind, and he shortly left me, and retired to rest.

On the next morning, 26th, the chief again questioned me respecting
the vessel, but I could give him no particular information, as I had
not seen her.--The natives then commenced knotting up leaves to
inquire of their god, who, they said, would inform them what was best
to be done. Towards night they departed, leaving me with my master,
giving him strict orders not to let me go to the vessel, fearing that
I should not only remain on board, but give information that my
shipmates had been murdered. I was glad to see them depart, for I
feared they would kill me.--The reader can have but a faint idea of my
feelings at that time; nor will I attempt to describe them.

Towards the close of the next day, (27th,) a canoe came to the Island
which had been boarded by a boat from the schooner. The natives
offered the men in the boat some cocoanuts, which they would not
accept. The boat then proceeded towards the Island of Milly.--The
natives informed me that the men in the boat inquired after the men
who were left there by the ship Globe; but they would not give any
information where they were. The canoe left the Island, and we went to
rest. The next day passed without hearing any thing of the schooner;
but the day following, (29th of Nov.) as I was walking in the woods in
the afternoon, I heard a dreadful outcry for Hussey. I ran to the hut
to learn the cause, and to my unspeakable joy, I discovered that one
of the schooner's boats was on the beach, waiting for me, the men all
armed and equipped for battle. As I approached, the Lieutenant spoke
to me and told me to come to him. I went and sat down by him. He asked
me several questions, but my feelings were so overcome and agitated,
that I know not whether I replied in English, or the language of the
natives. While we were sitting together, the old man whom I had always
called master, but who was now willing to be considered my servant,
asked me if the white people were going to kill him. The Lieutenant
inquired of me to know the purport of the old man's question; I told
him he was afraid of being killed. The Lieutenant replied that he
should not be hurt, if he behaved himself properly.

We then walked round the Island, and I collected what few things I
had, a musket, &c. and made preparations for our departure. My old
master being unwilling to part with me, asked permission to go with
me. I spoke to the Lieutenant on the subject, and he readily
consented. We then set sail, accompanied by my master and his son. We
soon fell in with the 2d Lieutenant, in another boat, who informed
that all the survivors of the Globe's crew were now rescued. The boats
soon lost sight of each other, as night came on, and that in which I
was arrived at the Island about 9 o'clock in the evening. We landed,
cooked supper, and anchored our boat at a little distance from the
shore for the night.

The next morning, (30th,) we got under weigh, accompanied by the other
boat, beat to the windward, for the outside passage, and then ran down
to the schooner, and got along side at 9 o'clock. I will leave it for
the reader, to picture my feelings on entering once more on board of
an American vessel, after having been among unmerciful savages 22
months. We soon had some breakfast, after which my hair was cut, which
was of two year's growth, and I was furnished with clothing, and
remained on board till the next day.

From this date to the time of our arrival in the United States, all
the important incidents and facts which transpired, will be found in
the preceding pages, arranged from the journal kept by Lay.

After expressing my thanks to all who assisted to rescue us from
savage bondage, and my gratitude to Heaven for a safe return to my
friends and native land, I bid the reader a respectful farewell.




A VOCABULARY

_Of Words and Phrases, used by the natives of the Mulgrave Islands,
with their definitions and so spelt and divided in syllables as to
give the Reader a very clear understanding of the pronunciation._


    Beard                         Cor y ack

    Iron                          Maale

    A sail                        Wood je lah

    An oar                        Thib bet

    Steering                      Kib bet tebet

    Sailing                       Der rauk yruk

    Sleep                         Mad du rah

    Awake                         Mim mit

    Dark                          Mar roak

    Light                         Mar rum

    Night                         Boong

    Day                           Roun

    Growing                       Aung

    Drowned                       Mal long

    Oil                           Bin in yep

    Water                         Pir ren

    A long time                   Et tow

    Yourself                      Guay

    Sleepy                        Mil tegee

    Victuals                      Cuck con

    Scrape                        Goo tock

    Build                         Ae

    Hold on                       Coppy dirry

    Man                           Mum marn

    Woman                         Civ rah

    Boy                           Lod rick

    Girl                          Lid rick

    An infant                     Hi dir ry

    Black                         Eg gil ly mit

    White                         Em mew it

    Red                           Em mirt

    Drink                         E ranck

    Fingers                       Jan thurt

    A bird                        Paw o

    A knife                       Noad rick

    Begging                       Angue ot

    Work                          Derry bol

    An adze                       Jal tosk

    A nail                        Mer ry

    Grass                         Oo joo et

    Leaves                        Bel ly bal

    Counting                      Bun ne bun

    One                           Jew on

    Two                           Roo ah

    Three                         Te lew

    Four                          A men

    Five                          Ri lim

    Six                           Dil je mo

    Seven                         Dil jil je ma jew on

    Eight                         Ad je no

    Nine                          Ad dil y mo jew on

    Ten                           Dongue ole

    Musketoe                      To cotch up

    Fear                          Cwurd

    Giving                        Hi dir inge

    A rope                        Tow

    Wind                          Gut to

    Rain                          Woot

    Lay down                      Bah boo

    Get up                        Der ry cock

    Not good                      Nah nah

    Very good                     En no

    Talking                       Com el tah to

    Fighting                      Tarr yin ia

    Kill                          Mon ny

    Smoke                         Bout

    Sand                          Boak

    Diving                        Doo lock

    Digging                       Cob e coob

    Bury                          Col ly boo ny

    Sewing                        Thil thil

    Eat                           Mong ah

    Singing                       Al lil

    Sun                           Al

    Moon                          Al lung

    Star                          E jew

    Sky                           I id ere lung

    Sun down                      Doo lock Al

    Sun rise                      Tuck in Al

    To-day                        Raun ene

    Yesterday                     In nay

    To-night                      Boon ene

    Tomorrow                      Geen a raun

    Puking                        Mom mit

    A blanket                     Cawd

    A costume                     Ene

    Fuel                          Con ny

    Land                          Yin ny

    A bottle                      Buck ah

    Cutting                       Boo way

    Fastening                     Geal ing

    Stealing                      Mid dart

    A rat                         Kid dir rick

    Hair                          Co coa no bot

    Ear                           Lou dil lyg nui

    Eyes                          Mid dat

    Nose                          Baw thurt

    Mouth                         Loung ing

    Chin                          Chim in ny gne ad

    Chief                         Tam moon

    Forward                       A marn

    Egg                           Lip

    Drift                         Pay lock

    Paddle                        Aun arn

    I know                        E del lah

    Yes                           Ing ah

    No                            Aub

    Backside                      Al by gin

    Playing                       Cook ke ry

    Medicine                      Oo noe

    Whale                         Rat

    A louse                       Git

    Strong                        Mad jo jow

    Enough                        Em mut

    Thread                        Uer

    Forget                        Mer no lock wy

    See                           Lal ly

    Bailing                       An ain

    Mast                          Cod jew

    A saw                         Dir re ban

    A sword                       Jah jay

    A handle                      Je jew er

    Running                       Tit thurt

    A musket                      Boo wat

    A cannon                      Bac ca

    Powder                        Bow on ope

    Fire                          Kid ja ick

    Hewing                        Jick e jick

    A house                       Imm

    Fish                          Ikk

    Stone                         Buck ah

    Head                          Bur run

    Hand                          Bon

    Foot                          Nane

    A shark                       Bac co

    A spear                       Mor ry

    Cocoanuts                     Koree

    Breadfruit                    Mah

    Go                            Wy lum

    Come                          Wy to

    Very large                    El lip

    Scar or cut                   Gin net

    Thunder                       Daw roort

    Lightning                     Dar rum

    Lizard                        Cid re be lin

    A canoe, or any vessel        Woa or Wah

    Put it down there             Lickitin i genny

    Throw it away                 Jow lock y

    I am thirsty                  E mar row

    Give me some drink            Letto lim ma dirick

    Finger nails                  Og guck

    Your father                   Gim mum

    His father                    Gim men

    My father                     Gim mah

    Your mother                   Gin mum

    His mother                    Gin nen

    My mother                     Gin nah

    Where are you going           Guay te wy jickut

    What are you doing            Guay je thah

    Where have you come from      Guay te wy to den air

    Is there any                  O ra cy

    One hundred                   Jib be wee

    One thousand                  Der rab bin

    What is the news              Ere nin narn

    A bag or pocket               Pau jaw

    Do you know                   Guay del larky

    What is that                  Mer root thany

    What part                     E thane

    You must not                  A mow

    A cable or anchor             Em mi tock

    A cask or chest               Tub be tub

    Chips or rubbish              Men a ca noak

    Laying a rope                 Bit the bit

    A cloud or squall             Cur raw

    Fair weather                  Em mon Lung

    Don't say a word              Tab co war roang aroang

    Sharpening iron tools         Jim me jim mal

    Day before yesterday          Jay marn

    Take that and go              Book y em ettal

    Sick at the stomach           Ma long a lung

    How large is this Island      Rir ret Ilong ene

    What's the name of this Isle  I tan Iling ene

    Going to sea                  Gib be lak


THE END.




Transcriber's Note

Archaic and uncommon spelling has been preserved as printed--for
example, chesnut instead of chestnut, pummice instead of pummace, etc.
Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been retained.

Variable spelling has been preserved where it appears due to
differences between the two authors, or where there was no way to
determine which was correct; instances include Humphreys--Humphries,
Edgarton--Edgartown, and Tabanawort--Tabarawort.

Minor punctuation errors have been repaired. The following amendments
have been made:

    Page 11--Lumbard amended to Lumbert--"... William
    Beetle, (mate,) John Lumbert, (2d mate,) ..."

    Page 15--Liliston amended to Lilliston--"... Wm.
    Humphries, a black man, and steward, and Thomas
    Lilliston."

    Page 20--Linniston amended to Lilliston--"... William
    Humphries, (the steward) of Philadelphia, and Thomas
    Lilliston; ..."

    Page 49--There amended to Their--"Their names were,
    Gilbert Smith, George Comstock, Stephen Kidder, ..."

    Page 74--fastastic amended to fantastic--"... and all
    ornamented in the same fantastic manner."

    Page 132--heathful amended to healthful--"... and keep
    the atmosphere healthful and salubrious ..."

    Page 166--Diveing amended to Diving--"Diving ... doo lock"

A table of contents has been added for the convenience of the reader.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Narrative of the Mutiny, on Board
the Ship Globe, of Nantucket, in the Pacific Ocean, Jan. 1824, by William Lay and Cyrus M. Hussey

